=== FILE_013 ===
CROWNS, PILLARS, 
THE ROSE and THE LILY
'elcome to the Tarot School course on imagery and intuition 
that we'll call The Secret Language of Tarot. In this course, 
we'll be exploring the meanings of the visual imagery of tarot in 
considerable detail and in depth. We think that by the time we're 
done, we'll have created a significant body of work that tarot students will find valuable for research and as important foundation 
material for the meanings of the cards.We'll be using the Rider-Waite-Smith imagery as our benchmark, 
but the information in this course should be transferable to any deck 
you care to use. We think it will also give your intuition a lot of additional material to work on. The symbolism and significance of the 
visual imagery of tarot is partly universal, partly esoteric, and partly 
tarot specific. All of it is historical, and all of it, we hope, will be fun 
to learn and useful in more ways than one.
 
=== FILE_014 ===
CROWNSWe begin with the crowns of tarot. In the RWS deck there are 
nineteen cards that contain a crown, and these come in many 
forms, each with a meaning of its own. The nineteen cards are: 
The High Priestess, The Empress, The Emperor, The Hierophant, 
The Chariot, Justice, Death, Temperance, The Tower, the Ace of 
Swords, the 4 of Pentacles, and all the kings and queens.We'll begin with some meanings for the crown in general, drawn 
from universal symbolism. The three main aspects of the crown's 
symbolism are:i. Being set on the crown (or top) of the head makes it a symbol of overriding significance. It shares the quality of the head 
(the summit) and what is above the head, a gift from on high. It 
also sets the seal of transcendence on any great achievement or 
accomplishment.2. Its circular shape is a symbol of perfection. It is a ring, worn 
on the head, that marries what is above to what is below.3. The material of which a crown is made dedicates the wearer 
to the form of divinity associated with that material. A gold 
crown, for example, associates the wearer with the alchemical 
properties of gold (i.e., purity, perfection, and the attainment of 
the highest possible states, both inner and outer).The word "crown" comes from the Latin "corona" and earlier from 
the Greek "korone" (curved) and "kornu" (horns).A corona is the circle of radiance surrounding a source of illumination. The main physical and symbolic example of a corona is 
the circle of radiance around the sun. In alchemy, each planet is illustrated as receiving its special radiance in the form of a crown 
given to it by the sun.
The corona around a physical or symbolic object can be shown 
as a concentric circle or as emanating rays. A halo, for example, is a 
spiritual corona surrounding the head of a spiritually elevated being.A diadem is a crown in the form of a circlet around the head 
or around the ceremonial hat on the head of a royal figure. It is 
a symbol of a divinely supported secular authority.A glory is an arc or a circle of rays around another visual symbol, suggesting divine inspiration or protection.Korone, the Greek word for curved, is used in this context for 
any form of circle or circlet worn on the head to signify a connection with the gods. This includes the wreath, the crest, and 
horns, as well as the crown, diadem, and tiara.Examples of different kinds of crowns in tarot include the:• horns of Isis (The High Priestess)• diadem of the zodiac (The Empress)• domed crown (The Emperor, The Tower)• papal tiara (The Hierophant)• celestial diadem (The Chariot)• toothed crown (Justice, the 4 of Pentacles)• glory (Temperance)• stylized diadems (kings and queens)The crown in all times and places has been associated with royalty, 
and royalty is conferred only by the divine recognition, symbolized by the crown. The crown is also a symbol of ultimate achievement, 
the sign of victory and pre-eminence in any field of endeavor (e.g., 
a crowning achievement, a heavyweight-boxing crown). In organisms, the crown is the top, as in the crown of the head or the crown 
of a tree.
No one can become the king or the queen of a kingdom of 
any kind without a crown. A coronation, the ritual of establishing legitimate royal authority, is the ritual of placing a crown on 
someone's head.Each separate crown in tarot has its own symbolism. Here are 
three examples:The High PriestessThe crown of The High Priestess is the crown 
of Isis/Hathor, two names of the Egyptian selfcreated Great Mother Goddess who brought 
forth everything else. Hathor was the Queen 
of Heaven, and Isis was the "Oldest of the Old 
who existed from the beginning."In both forms, as Isis and as Hathor, the 
goddess is said to have given birth to the 
sun. Hathor was the Nile Goose who laid the 
golden egg of the sun, and Isis was the womb 
of Horus who was the reincarnation of Osiris. 
The womb enclosing Horus in hieroglyphics is 
"Hat-Hor" or Hathor.Isis and Hathor as a pair were sometimes 
known as the Bright Mother and the Dark Mother. In later times, Isis was paired with her dark twin sister, 
Nepthys. Together they guaranteed the immortality of the pharaohs in the form of birth, death, and resurrection.
The visual emblem of these paired goddesses, as illustrated by 
the crown of The High Priestess, was the sun disk lying between 
the horns of the Moon-Cow Goddess. The central sun disk signifies the male spirit soon to be reborn (Horus), enclosed and protected by the horns of the goddess, one light and one dark.In Hellenistic and Roman culture, Isis was highly revered as 
the Divine Mother, "eternal savior of the race of men." The image 
of Isis suckling Horus became the model for images of the Virgin 
Mary holding the infant Jesus. Parts of the myth and worship of 
Isis were transferred to Mary early in the Christian era.The crown of Isis combines in The High Priestess with her 
watery robes and the sickle moon at her feet, symbols of Mary as 
Stella Maris (Star of the Sea), to join primary Egyptian and Christian 
spirituality in a single Hermetic image.Also, the lunar symbolism of The High Priestess's crown 
(waxing, full, and waning phases of the moon) is revered in NeoPaganism as the special sign of the Triple Goddess (Maiden, 
Mother, Crone).All together, the crown of The High Priestess is a universal 
symbol of the original authority of the divine feminine. In a reading, it will be useful to remember the power of all things feminine, 
the moon and its phases, and women's spirituality.
The HierophantThe crown of The Hierophant is a three-tiered, 
toothed golden crown-three gold diadems signifying divinely sanctioned rule over three kingdoms. The segmented, or toothed, top of a crown 
is a symbol of rays of the sun's light.The papal tiara is a triple diadem over a simple 
cap called a camelaucum from the Byzantine court 
of the seventh and eighth centuries, where it was a 
sign of high social status. The diadems were added 
one at a time over several hundred years and probably are more ornamental than symbolic. Still, the 
papal tiara signifies both a spiritual and a secular 
authority-rule over the Catholic Church and 
over the territory of the Vatican.Simultaneously, it is a Masonic reference hidden in a Christian one. The three tiers of the crown refer to the 
three degrees of Masonry, the three levels of initiation, and the 
three levels of attainable human consciousness. It is the symbol of 
the Teacher.The lowest level is the first degree of Entered Apprentice, 
whose field of endeavor is his physical body and his social existence. 
The Entered Apprentice strives to perfect his physical habits, his 
work ethic, and his social behavior.The second level corresponds to the second degree of 
Fellowcraft, or Masonic journeyman, whose field of endeavor is 
his mind and his psyche. This involves self-examination and psychological healing and wholeness, as well as academic study and 
intellectual refinement.The third level is that of a Master Mason, whose work is spiritual. His concern is the heart and the soul, both his own and oth ers'. As compassion, this concern takes the form of teaching and 
moral and symbolic leadership.
The gold color of the crown is an alchemical reference to purity 
and the perfection of the self in the Great Work.The three vertical lines at the top of the crown are a Qabalistic 
reference to the Hebrew letter associated with The Hierophant, 
which is Vav It means "hook" and refers to the manner in which 
The Hierophant, as the great teacher of tarot, binds together the 
highest of teachings with the physicality of his disciples.In a reading, The Hierophant's crown should remind you of 
spiritual leadership, moral, psychological and spiritual effort, and 
the learning process in general.The ChariotThe crown of The Chariot is a Masonic symbol, 
a composite of sun, moon, and stars and glory. 
This is one form of the Masonic Rule of Three, 
which generally states that every visible thing is 
paired, made of an active and a passive, an exuberant and a severe, a bright and a pale, a stable 
and a changeable aspect, and that an invisible 
divine moderating principal binds the opposites 
together.The sun is the symbol of everything active, 
exuberant, bright, and stable. The moon and 
stars are the symbol of what is passive, severe, 
pale, and changeable. The glory is the symbol 
of the divine perspective, which sees itself in 
every manifested form and resolves all dualities. In this card, the 
crown is a visual symbol of the consciousness that seeks to rule itself by bringing all forms of inner opposition into harmony. 
The sun, moon, and stars and glory represent all inner forms and 
forces harnessed to a single will and a central wisdom.
The crown is also a Qabalistic reference to the card's esoteric 
title, The House of Influence, which brings all good things from 
above to below and from below to above. It is a spiritualized astrology of sun, moon, and stars and a ruling, organizing, encompassing 
glory, the invisible whole that is hidden in its visible parts.In a reading, the crown of The Chariot reminds you of balance, harmony, self-control, and the wisdom to pull opposing forces 
together. It can also be a reminder of the blessings that flow from 
such harmony. 
=== FILE_015 ===
PILLARSThe people who created the system of imagery in the Rider-WaiteSmith deck were pretty serious people. Not much of a sense of 
humor, very much in their heads, not much heart, we think. But 
their thinking and their pictures are actually very interesting in 
themselves.We're at the beginning of a course on the meaning of tarot imagery, and you might have a question that ought to be answered. That 
question is, "What does this information do for me?" It is esotericism, 
art history, symbolism in general-maybe it's interesting, maybe not, 
but is it connected to you in some way? How might it be personal?Well, here's how. The whole deck is a special construction of 
symbols, and they have only two purposes here:i. They show you a path to your own highest nature, what is 
best and purest in you. They point to the path of return for anyone who wants to travel it. This may or may not be important to you now, but at some time in your life, you may find yourself 
very happy to have those pointers.
2. They bring divine energy down to the level of the everyday 
world, where they talk about everyday things in a powerful and 
useful way and teach you how to do the same.In both directions they remind you of tarot's version of how the 
world is made and how a human being is made, so you can use 
tarot to help yourself and others. It's hard to be a doctor if you 
don't know anatomy, and meaningful images are the anatomy of 
tarot.Symbols act something like electrical transformers. When electricity is generated at the power plant, it's measured in thousands 
and tens of thousands of volts. When you use electrical current to 
power your home appliances, you can use only iio volts at a time. 
Between the source and its ultimate uses stands a whole series of 
what are called step-down transformers, which make something 
overwhelming into something convenient and useful. In tarot, the 
visual imagery serves this function.In the previous section we talked about the crown. What is 
important to remember about a crown is that if you are ever entitled to wear one, it makes you unique. In any kingdom there is only 
one true crown, and it is the symbol of what is best, highest, and 
most responsible in the wearer.At its best, the crown marries the wearer to his or her highest 
self. At its worst, it gives authority to someone who hasn't earned 
it, creating a tyrant.And now we come to the pillar.What you most need to know and remember about the pillar 
in general is its masculinity. It rises vertically from the horizontal plane of the earth. It is intended to be an absolute contrast to things as they normally are. It is a symbol of intentional difference. 
Of course, there are times when the pillar becomes feminine, but 
we'll get to that later.
Pillars serve four main purposes:1. to support2. to define3. to identify4. to separateIn its function as support, a pillar keeps what is raised up from coming down. This is true in a building, where structural pillars hold up 
roofs and upper stories. To damage or remove such a pillar threatens the entire structure. This is also true in social and symbolic 
structures. Certain traditions, rites, and individuals are considered 
pillars whose presence supports the whole structure. Even heaven 
is supposed to be supported by pillars.The function of support implies will, endurance, purpose, and 
the ability to surrender individuality to the common good. The pillar here is a humble servant.The second function of a pillar is definition. In this form, 
strength is not the issue and a single pillar is not enough. It must 
be one of many, whose purpose is to create a line or circle on one 
side of which is the ordinary everyday world and on the other is 
a special, even a consecrated space. Here, too, the individuality 
implied in the phallic vertical shaft is subordinated to the higher 
purpose of the group.The third function is to serve as a proud marker for the existence 
of a god or a hero. When such a pillar is erected, it is a statement: 
"Here dwells the spirit of .... whose name is sacred or glorious." 
In this form only, a pillar stands alone, supporting nothing but an 
important memory or serving as a living reminder of some potent 
personality.
None of these three functions can be found in the RWS tarot. 
So why mention them? Just for the fun of it, or in case you come 
across pillars serving these functions in other decks.The fourth function of a pillar is to separate one condition 
from another. This function uses pillars in pairs, as a gateway or 
entrance to sacred space and the mysteries of a higher condition 
or consciousness. This is how the pillar appears in tarot, on just 
three cards: The High Priestess, The Hierophant, and justice.Let me remind you here that tarot is nothing but a concoction 
whipped up out of symbols. The RWS deck in particular is a world 
of symbols with a lineage. And this lineage has three levels:i. The ritual universe of the Order of the Golden Dawn. Many 
of its symbols were drawn into tarot, and tarot itself is used in 
its rituals. It is a universal language that can translate one kind 
of magical jargon into another. In tarot, alchemy easily becomes 
Qabalah, which becomes astrology and numerology, and so on.2. The Golden Dawn, in turn, drew heavily on the symbolism 
and ritual of Freemasonry, which has no dealings with tarot at 
all. The Waite deck gets its symbolism from Freemasonry more 
than any other source.3. Masonic symbolism emerges from a mix of biblical, Greek, 
and Egyptian philosophy and religion, each of which tried in 
its own way to explain God, man, and the world. Freemasonry 
turned these explanations into galleries of images and pictures 
that it mixed and merged in its own way to make its own explanation of the nature of things.So this brings us back to pillars and tarot. There are, as we said, 
just three cards in our deck that have pillars on them, The High Priestess, The Hierophant, and Justice. If you understand the pillars of The High Priestess, you understand the essence of the others. And here the pillars become feminine.
The High PriestessThere are three visual aspects of the pillars of 
The High Priestess that especially stand out:First, the pillars of The High Priestess are 
a pair-so you know you're looking at a symbol of initiation. On one side of the gateway 
they create is the person who is looking at 
them-mainly you, out in the world, ignorant, 
but knowing that important knowledge awaits 
when you pass between them. The pillars are 
considered to be the labia that mark the vaginal entrance to the Holy of Holies, the location 
of the feminine mysteries.Second, one pillar is black and one is white. 
You would naturally tend to believe that this 
is the symbolism of complementary opposites, 
like night and day, darkness and light. In this you 
would be correct. Ceremonial Magick appears to have introduced 
these colors in its own version of Egyptian ritual, but I haven't seen 
any evidence that this is actually Egyptian.In a popular form of an esoteric initiation ceremony there is 
a version of the Egyptian Hall of Truth where the black and white 
pillars stand at the entrance. The candidate for initiation is brought 
before these pillars and there makes a "negative confession." The 
individual states that he or she is not guilty of a particular list of sins and failings associated with forty-two judges who reside within the 
Hall. The candidate must demonstrate specific esoteric knowledge 
and declare several levels of purification, in addition to the negative 
confession, before being allowed to go further. All these procedures 
are incised as decoration on the two pillars, although that is not 
shown on the card.
The third and most mysterious feature is the letter on each pillar. A white B appears on the black pillar and a black J appears on 
the white pillar. These letters stand for Boaz and Jachin, respectively, which were the names given to the two pillars that stood 
before Solomon's Temple. We're sure of that from direct biblical 
quotes. After that, nothing is certain. There is no written biblical or 
Talmudic explanation for these names, and all the esoteric explanations are guesswork or invention.The standard translation of "Boaz" is "in him is strength," but 
it needs to be understood that this strength is in him as potential, 
the way a child is in the womb waiting to be born. It isn't there 
yet. And "Jachin," which is usually translated as "God establishes," 
is more accurately "God prepares," and the biblical commentary 
says that this refers to the coming of the Messiah. Nowhere in 
biblical commentary are the two names connected in any way. 
Although there certainly must be some connection, it was never 
written down. This is one example of a biblical secret that remains 
strictly oral.An interesting note is that in some Masonic literature, "Jachin" 
becomes "Joachim." And Joachim was the father of the Joseph, who 
married Mary, who gave birth to Jesus.What the names on the pillars do is connect Egyptian with 
biblical tradition. They bring into the picture the symbolism of 
Solomon's Temple, which is extremely important to both the 
Western esoteric tradition in general and to Masonic tradition in particular. The Solomonic pillars, by the way, were not black and 
white but brass. Also, a biblical verse refers to an ornamentation of 
pomegranates around the tops of both pillars. Since there was no 
room to picture this ornamentation on the pillars in the card, they 
were transferred to the veil between the pillars.
All the final secrets of Western magic as a spiritual path are said 
to be located in the Temple behind the pillars. The pillars are the 
only approach to these secrets, and Freemasonry considers itself to 
be that entranceway, to be the very pillars themselves.JusticeThe pillars of justice describe the part of an 
initiation ritual in which the candidate stands 
between the pillars, under the Balance of 
Justice, and names and explains the significance 
of all of the pillars' parts. This is a test the candidate must not fail but for which he or she 
has carefully prepared, since the information is 
fairly elaborate. In the card of justice, the pillars are pictured as plain, so as not to give away 
the answers to the test.
The HierophantIn The Hierophant, the pillars with the Hierophant between them are the ritual symbol of 
Osiris on his throne, the Egyptian deity presiding over the entire process of initiation.Because we don't have a lot of space, and 
because it doesn't serve our specific purpose, we 
won't go into the symbolism of the pillars' construction or other aspects of ritual. What you 
want to remember here is that the pillars are 
the place and also the effort of initiation. All the 
secrets that become the universe pass between 
these pillars into the world, and everyone who 
wants to know these secrets has to come to these 
pillars and find a way to pass between them.I think most of you know that the primary 
energy of tarot is understood to be sexual energy. Well, here's sexual 
energy as the lust for knowledge.The pillars are symbols of all the gateways to new and important 
knowledge in our lives, to the improvement of our lives through 
knowledge, and of the importance of making the effort to learn.
 
=== FILE_016 ===
THE ROSE AND THE LILYWelcome to our class on the symbol of the rose and the lily. Now, 
the rose is a symbol by itself. So is the lily. But the rose and the lily 
is a compound symbol that is different than either of its constituent parts.The rose appears, in red and in white, by itself in many cards. 
But the lily never appears alone. Wherever you find a lily in the 
RWS deck, you find a red rose.There are just five cards that contain this symbol: two Majors, 
two Minors, and a court card. The Majors are The Magician and 
The Hierophant; the Minors are the Ace of Pentacles and the 2 
of Wands. The court card is the King of Pentacles. In this class, 
we'll be talking about the first four of these. The King of Pentacles 
will have a place of honor all by himself in the next class. As you 
may have come to expect, our symbol means different things in 
different cards. But before we talk about these cards, let's look at 
the two flowers as separate symbols.The LilyThe lily, in olden times, was the floral emblem of several goddesses. 
One was the northern European goddess Eostre. Her name was 
derived from the ancient word for spring: "eastre." This goddess is 
the source of both the name of the holiday of Easter and its association with the lily.Juno, the Roman equivalent of the Greek goddess Hera, is also 
associated with the lily. Roman Pagans said that the first lily sprang 
from her breast milk. Roman Christians said that the lily sprang 
from the breast milk of Mary.In Europe, the lily became the symbol of the female "cup" containing the essence of life. The word "chalice" derives from "calyx," the word referring to the cup of the lily flower. The lily is a symbol of the miraculous impregnation of virgin goddesses. According 
to Roman mythology, the "blessed virgin Juno" gave birth to the 
god Mars by means of an immaculate conception. The parallel with 
Mary and Jesus is obvious.
Lilies are synonymous with whiteness, therefore with purity, 
innocence, and virginity. But because of its spicy-sweet scent, the 
lily has been characterized by some as an aphrodisiac and associated with Venus and the satyrs. Because of its prominent phallic 
pistils, the lily is also perceived as masculine. This combination of 
qualities is said to be one of the reasons why the kings of France 
chose the lily (fleur de lis) as the emblem of French royalty.Because of its whiteness, the lily has been described as lunar, 
pale, and connected to silver, a symbol of love unfulfilled and/ 
or sublimated. As pure, sublimated love, the lily is a symbol of 
Christ.In the Song of Solomon, there is a famous line that reads: `As 
the lily among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters." It is 
a reference to Israel's position among the nations and Mary's position among women.The famous line from the Gospel of Matthew reads, "Consider 
the lilies of the field, how they grow. They toil not, nor do they 
spin." By placing themselves in the hands of divine providence, lilies prosper. The lily thus becomes a symbol of surrender to divine 
grace.In a famous early Christian sermon, the lily of the valley is 
likened to Christ (the lily) in the world of men (the valley)-the 
redeemer in the midst of sin, purity in the midst of impurity.The lily has six petals, and in esoteric lore it is a symbol of the 
cool and distant macrocosm, the world above in the axiom, `As 
above, so below"
The RoseThe rose, on the other hand, has five petals (the original, not the 
genetically bred varieties). It is the symbol of the heat of passion 
and involvement, the microcosm, the world below.But the rose, too, is dual in its sexual symbolism. It is, first of 
all, the emblem of Venus, goddess of love and passion. And from 
this primary attribution comes the story of how the rose became a 
symbol of secrecy and confidentiality.Rome adopted the Egyptian sun god Horus as part of the cult 
of Isis that came to them through Greece. The Greeks had taken 
him over as Horus the child. His name in Egyptian was her-pa-khrad, 
and the Greeks turned it into Harpocrates. The hieroglyph for a 
child was a seated boy sucking his finger. The Greeks thought this 
showed him with his finger to his lips, and so they made him the 
god of silence and secrecy.The cult of Harpocrates became very popular especially among 
upper-class Romans. There is a famous story from those times in 
which Cupid was said to have given a rose to Harpocrates as a 
thank-you gift for not telling tales about his mother Venus, the 
goddess of sensual love. So the rose became the symbol of confidentiality in the classical Roman world. The ceilings of dining 
rooms were decorated with roses to remind guests that what was 
said there when they were drunk was sub rosa (under the rose) and 
was therefore privileged and not to be made public. The phrase 
"sub rosa" and its meaning was well known and used all throughout 
Europe from Roman times to the present day. It even appeared as 
a symbol in the confessional.From the carnality of Venus, the rose passes to the purity of 
Mary, as the sign of her love, compassion, and perfection. And from 
there it becomes the emblem of alchemical perfection, symbol of 
the Sun.
But in another form of Christian symbolism, the rose takes on a 
masculine character. It becomes the emblem of Christ, of the blood 
of his sacrifice-the token of his love and compassion for humanity. 
Thus the rose becomes the sign of the Rosicrucians, the Order of 
the Rose Cross, whose primary symbol and core mystical perception is the vision of the rose emanating from the point of juncture 
of the arms of the cross.The single five-petaled red rose is a general sign of completion 
and perfection. Specifically it is a symbol of-9 the mystic center (as in the Rose Cross)• the heart (as in the Sacred Heart of Mary and Jesus)• the Garden of Eros (of Venus and Cupid)• the Beloved (in the Song of Solomon)The white rose is a symbol of rebirth and immortality.The gold rose is a symbol of consummate achievement.The blue rose is a symbol of the impossible.The five-petaled rose is a circular mandala of the esoteric conception of microcosm. The seven-petaled rose corresponds to all 
things seven, such as the seven directions, the seven traditional 
planets, and the seven alchemical metals. The eight-petaled rose is 
a symbol of regeneration similar to the white rose.Now the time has come to talk about the four cards in which the 
rose and the lily appear together as a single compound symbol.
The MagicianIn the landscape of The Magician, red roses hang 
in garlands from the top of the card above The 
Magician's head. The top of his double-tipped 
wand points directly at the roses above him. There 
are also a number of roses at the bottom of the 
card. The lilies can be found only at the bottom of 
the card, where they are large and distinct.Here, the rose and the lily refer mainly to 
the esoteric function of The Magician, which is 
the double function of life and death. He brings 
things to life by paying attention to them and 
allows them to die by ignoring them.Part of the symbolism of the rose is the heat 
and passion of life. Roses are the traditional 
flowers of betrothals, weddings, and declarations 
of love. Roses are edible and are an ingredient in magickal, culinary, and healing herbal ingestibles. Lilies, especially the lily of the 
valley, are funeral flowers. They are poisonous and associated with 
death, but they are also associated with purity and redemption, 
which are religious funerary themes.In the picture on the card, the blood red flowering rose is 
a symbol of the feminine path of emergence, of embodiment in 
life. The white, trumpet-shaped lily, with its prominent phallic 
pistils, is a symbol of the masculine path of return to the world of 
spirit. Although it can be disturbing to realize, the path of return 
is a journey to disembodiment and at least a spiritual death. 
Sometimes this journey can involve martyrdom and actual death 
in the service of a divinity.The rose and the lily in tarot are the symbols of the Qabalistic 
drop of red and drop of white that create the world in all its bewildering multiplicity. Simultaneously, they are the alchemical red and white, whose marriage is a token of ultimate unity and the resolution of all disharmonies.
These two themes of creating and dissolving the complexities 
of existence are the life and death functions of The Magician, and 
the symbol of the rose and the lily illustrates both themes equally 
and simultaneously.In a practical application of this idea, if The Magician comes up 
in a reading, you could say that positive things come alive for you 
when you pay attention to them and work at them. But they wither 
and perish if you ignore them long enough. On the other hand, you 
could say that you aggravate and energize a difficult situation by 
obsessing about it, but you can purify and heal negativity by denying it importance and attention.The HierophantHere, the rose and the lily appear as the distinguishing marks of two kinds or styles of learning. Two 
acolytes kneel before The Hierophant, each imbibing his teachings in a completely different way, each 
leading down a different path to the same goal.The rose is a symbol of the path of the heart, 
of devotion and love. On this path, a seeker 
surrenders his or her heart to the loving compassion of the teacher and the beauty of the path as 
it is revealed. It is said that the only language of 
the heart is tears, and when you are filled with 
love, all you can do is let your tears well up and cry. 
The rose is a symbol of unconditional love, such 
as the love between mother and child and the love 
between a great being and his or her disciples. To learn what The 
Hierophant has to teach, love and devotion are all that is needed.
The lily is the path of the mind, of purity, renunciation, and 
knowledge. On this path, a seeker becomes ascetic. Through the 
effort of resisting the temptations of a passionate nature and through 
endless study, you can raise and purify any desire, intention, or path 
and in the end reach the lofty goals set by an elevated teaching.The choice between these two approaches to morality, ethics, 
wisdom, and spiritual leadership is dictated by personal predilection. Some take one path, some the other.The issues here often involve moral or ethical choices and how 
to approach them. What is separated by the rose and the lily is 
joined and resolved by The Hierophant. Issues of tolerance and a 
need for discrimination versus conviction and a need to make hard 
choices arise when The Hierophant turns up and your attention is 
drawn to the rose and the lily.2 of WandsThe first Minor Arcana card with the rose and 
the lily in it is the 2 of Wands. In this card, the 
compound symbol of these two flowers as a 
visual unit is the clearest of all. On a gray stone 
block that is part of the castle's parapet and that 
has the approximate proportions of a double 
cube altar (another symbol for another time), 
there is a white square. In the white square is a 
tilted equal-armed cross. Each arm of the cross 
is a living plant stem, and on the ends of each of 
the four arms is a blossom. These blossoms are 
alternating roses and lilies.So what could this be about? At first glance, 
there are alchemical and Rosicrucian possibilities here. But neither of these has any particular relevance to the 2 of Wands and wouldn't have a prominent place 
on this card.
We had spoken earlier of how the lily has a mythical connection 
with Juno, the mother of Mars, whose color is the red of the rose. That 
only has a passing connection with this card through its astrological 
attribution of Mars in Aries. But it is the astrological attribution that 
turns out to be important. This will take a moment to explain.Each of the Minor Arcana cards (except the aces) has an astrological attribution consisting of a planet in a sign. If you work with 
just the 2 through io, that gives you nine cards in each of the four 
suits, or thirty-six cards. Each card therefore equals io degrees of 
a circle, or a decan. The thirty-six decans equal the 36o degrees of 
a complete circle. Each decan contains either ten or eleven days to 
make the 365 days of the year. That works neatly. Three cards, or 
3o degrees, make one astrological sign, and the twelve signs of the 
zodiac make the complete wheel of the year.Well, the 2 of Wands is Mars in Aries, which is the beginning of 
spring. This is the start of the warm part of the year after winter has 
come to an end, and it is symbolized in this card by Mars as the rose.Now comes the astrological rub that gives us the lily part of the 
symbol.In the ancient astronomy used in tarot, only seven planets 
existed. because that was all that could be seen with the naked eye. 
So up to the beginning of the twentieth century, when the most 
distant planets were discovered, astrology used only those planets.That meant that there were seven planets to assign to the thirtysix decans that make up a year. Seven, as you can see, doesn't divide 
evenly into thirty-six. When you divide thirty-six by seven, you 
get five, with one left over. So one planet had to appear six times 
instead of five. Mars was chosen to be that planet, and it appears 
for the second time in the io of Cups as Mars in Pisces, the end 
of winter. Pisces is the last sign of winter, just as Aries is the beginning of spring. The esoteric community decided that an extra boost of energy was needed to make the transition from winter's cold to 
spring's warmth, and Mars was chosen to be the planetary symbol 
of that energy. So Mars in Pisces is followed by Mars in Aries. The 
lily, associated with the alchemical cold of a water sign, is followed 
by the rose, associated with the alchemical heat of a fire sign. This 
order of water sign followed by fire sign, cold followed by heat, is 
repeated throughout the zodiac.
In this symbol, mythology, astrology, and alchemy are joined 
together. The issues here are an ending leading to a new beginning, 
the conclusion of one cycle with all its drama and the beginning of 
a completely new story, something already achieved and something 
waiting to be done-all accomplished with the warlike intensity of 
Mars. This is one implication of the esoteric title of the 2 of Wands, 
the Lord of Dominion.Ace of PentaclesThe final landscape featuring the rose and the 
lily is the Ace of Pentacles.Here the meaning is simple. The lily 
assumes pride of place, being in the foreground 
of the card, and roses are smaller, less distinct, 
and in the background of the card. In part, the 
picture shows a well-kept garden, with short 
green grass in the midst of which cultivated 
lilies grow on long stalks. Far away, mountain 
peaks can be seen through the arched opening 
in a hedge, which separates the garden from the 
distant heights. Roses grow small and wild in 
the greenery of the hedge.The meaning of rose and lily is a biblical reference to a famous line from the Song of Solomon, which says, "I am the lily of the valley and the rose of the deep." In 
Qabalistic lore, the rose in this case is associated with grace and the 
lily with judgment, and both flowers are to be found in Malkuth, the 
bottom of the Tree of Life and the end of the journey of emergence. 
Malkuth is the valley and the deep, symbolized in the Ace of Pentacles 
by the garden and the hedge respectively.
In Christian symbolism, Christ is referred to as the lily who 
dwells in the valley, a symbol of the promise of redemption in the 
midst of a mundane existence.Here the issue is the acceptability of an unfettered joy in the 
real world just as it appears. Is it OK to enjoy life without hesitation or any need of repentance? Is the world OK without fixing? Is 
creation good as it stands? Or do pain and suffering require us to 
turn to spirituality for solace and explanation? Is the world of the 
flesh inherently evil? Once again, each person will be drawn by his 
or her personal style more to one approach than the other.In all the differences of interpretation in these four cards, the 
rose and the lily together describe the underlying primal mystery 
of male and female, of the sexual energy from which the universe 
descended and by means of which it will return to its original purity 
and wholeness.For alchemy, the Great Work of separating the fine from the 
gross, of raising the high from the low, and achieving sublime 
perfection is symbolized by the Alchemical Wedding of sun and 
moon, rose and lily, red and white. In their union, everything is 
completed and humanity returns to divinity the original gift of 
perfection.In a Kabbalistic midrash a comparison is made between God 
and an artist. An artist, they say, creates a great painting, and the 
painting is applauded. But God creates the whole universe, and the universe praises its creator. When an artist creates a great painting, 
the painting endures but the artist perishes. When God creates 
the universe, God endures and the universe passes. An artist creates his painting with a palette of many colors. But God creates the 
entire universe with a drop of red and a drop of white.
The rose and the lily are that drop of red and drop of white. 
Their combined beauties are the underlying beauty of the whole 
of creation, and their mingled fragrance is the incense of divinity 
that pervades every force and form, every name and change, that 
makes the universe.The power of the rose and the lily is to beget love. When you fall in 
love, it is the beauty of the rose and lily you see in your beloved. When 
you discover wisdom and experience devotion, it is the fragrance of 
the rose and lily that fills the sacred chalice you have become. 
=== FILE_017 ===
INTEGRATION: 
CROWNS, PILLARS,THE ROSE AND THE LILYMost of the images in tarot, even the little bits and pieces of larger 
pictures, are symbols, and all symbols are reminders of some form 
of truth. Every symbol in the deck has a spiritual, intellectual, emotional, and practical aspect, and every one is useful at one time or 
another.Here are some of the issues that arise from the imagery of crowns, 
pillars, and the rose and lily. The issues are not definitive. Instead, 
they are meant to provoke thought, feeling, and discussion.CrownsWhen a crown catches your attention in a reading, you can be sure 
it concerns a matter of overriding importance.
A crown is always a gift from above-sometimes in recognition of a great achievement, sometimes as a demand for such an 
achievement.Crowns require their wearers to be perfect. They recognize the 
potential in a person for such perfection, and accepting a crown is 
an acknowledgement of the demand for perfection.The energy of a crown is a source of light, illumination, and 
radiance. One who wears a crown is expected to be such a source of 
illumination of others.The outward authority conferred by a crown begins with an 
inner authority. And with authority comes responsibility.There are visible and invisible crowns, acknowledged and unacknowledged authority. Whoever wears a crown is the source of 
power and legitimacy. There are hidden teachers, exiled royalty, lineages of master and disciple where a crown passes in secret from an 
older to a younger head.Each crown is special and confers its own authority and responsibility A particular crown gives you a particular job-to protect, to 
teach, to lead, to reconcile, to save.A crown is most of all a ring, signifying the marriage of the 
giver and the wearer. It is the commitment of the giver to empower, 
protect, and love the wearer. It is the reciprocal commitment of 
the wearer to perform to the utmost the duties that come with the 
crown, to surrender to the love of the giver, and above all, to return 
that love completely. This is equally true of a spouse and a king.PillarsBy itself, a single pillar is masculine. By itself, a pillar can be a humble support that carries the weight of a whole structure. Your spinal 
column is masculine, and it supports your whole being. But you pay 
no attention to it unless it hurts.
By itself, a pillar can get your attention. Its uprightness and visibility lend pride, honor, and recognition to a person or event worth 
remembering.In combination, pillars are feminine. In rows or circles, pillars 
define sacred and special places. Together they make an inside and 
an outside.The outside is reserved for the ordinary and governed by the 
laws of the lowest common denominator. The outside is the place 
of the many, the place for everyday concerns governed by custom, 
necessity, and universally accepted social standards.The inside is the place of the unusual, the hidden, and the 
secret. Different rules apply here, and only those who need and 
deserve to know those rules know them. The inside demands the 
highest, best, purest, and most powerful qualities. It is the place of 
the few, forbidden to the many.The outside and the inside negate each other, but need each 
other. Each is the justification for the other.In pairs, pillars are also the gateway from outside to inside. 
They are the means of passage. Each pillar in a pair is half of 
what is necessary to gain entrance to the hidden, the special, and 
the sacred. Each is half of an argument, half of an irreconcilable 
difference. By means of either half alone, no passage is possible, 
no entrance is granted. One side of an argument, one position out 
of two, leads to nowhere but itself.A pair of pillars presents a challenge and an imperative. You 
can't pass to the secrets and wonders within unless you meet the 
challenge and resolve it. You can't ignore the challenge either. You 
only become aware of it because it is important to you, perhaps 
even crucial. If you turn away, you will have been defeated without even trying. And such a defeat causes pervasive sadness and 
permanent regret.To accept the challenge is a masculine response to the lure of 
a feminine treasure. And it carries risks. First is the risk of failure. Second is the risk of success. And third is the risk of involvement and 
commitment. To meet the challenge and pass through the gateway of 
the pillars is to find out who you always were but never knew, to gain 
the totality of yourself. This is the inner nature of initiation.
On the outside of the gateway you are a civilian. On the inside, 
you are who you were meant to be. The more imposing the pillars, 
the more difficult the passage and the greater the person awaiting 
you on the other side.The Rose and the LilyEach by itself is wonderful and opposite. The rose is passionate, 
involved, understanding, and intimate. These qualities give the 
greatest pleasure, make the experience of life intense, and are 
great companions in good times and bad. The lily is pure, dispassionate, wise, and distant. As qualities, these make excellent 
advisors in the midst of confusion, trusted friends and reliable 
supports in times of crisis, and they offer solutions when things 
get impossible.Together they create beauty, love, desire, and the goodness in 
everything. A vision of the rose and the lily annihilates ugliness 
and falsehood. A whiff of their scent carries you through pain and 
sorrowThey offer the gifts of a great life and a good death. They are 
the secret powers of pointing to and turning away.Together they are in love, not at war. Rose and lily, heart and 
mind, allow each other completion. Each is enough by itself Each 
makes the other a complete path to any goal.In sequence, their energy brings one chapter of a story to a close 
and opens the next. Winter finds the energy to become spring.They teach you to enjoy this world, to become perfect in it, to 
rise above it, and to find the secret center of yourself.
 
=== FILE_018 ===
SYMBOL SPREAD: 
THE TWO PILLARS,THE ROSE,THE LILY, 
AND THE CROWNThis is the first in a series of spreads based upon the tarot symbols 
studied in this course. It makes use of the concepts discussed in the 
classes on the pillars, the rose and lily, and the crown, and it is ideally suited for conflict resolution readings.The layout below consists of two vertical columns of four cards 
each-the Pillars-spaced about six inches apart. The left-hand 
pillar represents one side of the conflict-a person, group, choice, 
or idea. The right-hand pillar represents the opposing side.Three inches or so up from the bottom, two cards are placed 
in the central area between the pillars. The card on the left is the 
Rose. The card on the right is the Lily. They are separated from 
each other by the space of one card.Directly above that space, place the final card-the Crown.Each four-card Pillar describes the energies and characteristics that make up that side of the conflict. They point out the core issues that are important to that side-those things that define its 
position in the conflict and that are holding it back from reaching 
resolution. Although read sequentially, each set of four cards should 
be considered as a group.
Each card in a Pillar should be contrasted with the card in 
the same position in the opposite Pillar. So you have four sets of 
pairs: i-5, 2-6, 3-7, and 4-8. For example, let's say card #i is The 
Magician and card #5 is The Star reversed. On the one hand, the 
first pillar is expressing a focused and willful energy, while the card 
opposite it might indicate a lack of equilibrium and a sense that all 
is not right with the world. Perhaps there might be a wish for quiet 
withdrawal as opposed to going full steam ahead. You can see right 
away how these opposing energies can contribute to the conflict.The three cards in the center hold the key to how the two sides 
can work towards passing between the pillars and moving forward 
together.The Rose is the path of the heart. The card in this position will 
show the nature of a loving way to proceed-how to express emotions in a positive way.The Lily is the path of the mind. The card in this position will 
show the nature of a rational way to proceed-what to focus mental 
energy on.The Crown defines the higher purpose of the conflict and its 
resolution and is the outcome to hold as a common goal.Although much can be seen from this spread in a quick read, we 
suggest you leave the cards out for a while (or write them in a notebook) and contemplate them over a period of time. Conflicts made 
up of the immovable blocks that make up the pillars are usually not 
resolved overnight and bear thoughtful consideration and persistent 
effort.May this spread help find a way through for you and for those 
who seek your guidance.
 
=== FILE_019 ===
PATHS, 
MOUNTAINS, CROSSES
 
=== FILE_020 ===
PATHSWelcome to our class on the image of the path in tarot, which 
occurs in four cards-the 8 of Pentacles, the Ace of Pentacles, The 
Moon, and Temperance.As you know, we've already done a number of classes on the 
meaning of imagery in the Rider-Waite-Smith deck. To make 
classes like that happen, we have to do quite a bit of research, and 
up to now it's been fairly easy. But our experience this time was 
different.Our usual sources had almost nothing to say on the subject of 
paths. Even the dictionary was useless; it didn't even point a direction. Our intuition told us that this was an enormously powerful 
symbol, although our first search for information was frustrated.
But we persevered and eventually found what we needed. 
When the gates of information finally opened, we discovered that 
our original intuition was right. The symbolism of the path is very 
rich and very important.The essence of the matter is simply that a path facilitates the 
happening of whatever needs to happen. This is true on a physical level in the physical world for all sorts of creatures, including 
human beings, and it is even truer in the inner world of human 
beings. Paths in the physical world are simple. They need no explanation. But in the inner life of a human being, that simplicity gives 
way to the most extraordinary subtlety and complexity.At this point, let's do a meditation.Path 
Meditation
Breathe and relax.Surround yourself with darkness and rest there for awhile.The darkness gives way to the soft light of the moon or to the light of 
the sun.You find yourself in a landscape of forest, meadow, or mountainside. 
There are no other people around or signs of human habitation anywhere. A little way ahead you see the beginning of a path. Move towards 
it now.Take a moment to observe the path without setting foot on it.Soon you will follow the path for awhile, paying careful attention to 
everything you see along the way and how the experience of traveling 
the path makes you feel.
This will happen on your next breath.(2-3 minutes) Follow the path wherever it leads.It is time to leave this path for the time being. In a moment, you will step 
off the path, back into the comforting darkness from which you began. 
This will happen on your next breath.As you cloak yourself in the familiar darkness, breathe and relax. Slowly 
become aware of your physical body and your current surroundings, and 
when you are ready, open your eyes.The first step we need to take in understanding the nature of a path 
is to define it, which we'll do even without the help of a dictionary. 
The definition of a thing is often found at the boundary between 
what it is and what it is not, and that's where we'll begin. We'll 
make our way from this general beginning through some powerful 
examples from a variety of places and cultures to the paths of tarot 
and the particular paths in specific cards.Let's start with a useful question. How do you know a path 
when you see one? Here are some of the ways:i. A path is a natural part of a natural landscape. It is not paved, 
and there's no sign of any organized effort to create it.2. A path is distinct from its landscape-it is figure to the landscape's ground. You can see a path and know for sure that it 
exists. It is not ambiguous or unclear.3. A path is made by the passage of many living feet, guided by 
the same intention.
4. A path is narrow, allowing for the passage of only a single 
individual at a time.5. A path is unmarked, other than by the clarity of its contrast 
with the landscape through which it passes. It is unregulated, 
unpoliced, unattended. Passage over it is a matter of personal 
choice or personal destiny.6. A path does not have to be traveled from end to end. It does 
not insist on completion. The reason for traveling it may be 
either a goal or an experience.7. What can be said of a physical path can also be said of a 
symbolic one.A path is not a road.i. A road is an intentional creation, made by the organized 
effort of a few on behalf of many.2. A road is regulated, organized, and maintained, again, by the 
few on behalf of the many.3. The purpose of a road is to facilitate rapid and easy passage 
from beginning to end. It is not meant to facilitate experience, except as a possible by-product of traveling to a chosen 
destination.4. A road invites rapid rather than languorous movement, and it 
frowns on departure from its way and its rules. A road is public 
and allows only what is proper in public.
5. A road encourages simultaneous and constant use by the 
many to justify the time, effort, and resources of the few who 
created and maintain it.A path is not a way, although sometimes one becomes the other.i. A way exists only as the report of one who has experienced 
it. It cannot be seen or experienced without such a report, and 
it cannot be traveled without a guide.2. A way is the means of passage across shifting landscapes or 
abstract distances-like water, sand, and sky or the farthest 
reaches of mind, soul, and spirit.3. No one would travel such a way if they were not intentionally tempted with the benefits of completing it. The benefits of 
completing a way are also known only to one who has accomplished it and are available only on the report of such a one.4. Traveling a way needs faith, since both the way and its reasons are invisible to the uninitiated eye.5. Because a way only exists for the potential traveler as a matter 
of faith, it is subject to possible abuse. Reports of a way can be 
claimed without basis, and guides for such a way may be frauds 
or fools. To trust a reported way leads to the danger of being 
gulled. But to be skeptical leads to the danger of losing the 
possibility of a great benefit.A path, with its clear delineation against the background of a known 
landscape, may become a way in the end. But then it is a necessary 
and inevitable continuation of something you have come to trust, 
and so it may be trusted as well.
At this point, when a path loses itself in a way, the two together 
may become transmuted into a journey.A journey is not a path, though it may include one.i. A journey is long and may involve both paths and ways.2. A journey is a commitment to a long-term goal and fails if the 
goal is not reached. But a path may be traveled at the convenience of the traveler and does not require completion.3. While a journey allows for and even encourages experience, 
all experience is in the service of the goal. A path permits and 
encourages experience for its own sake. What is experienced 
along a path may become more important than the original reason for traveling it.4. A journey is a line, and its end is far from its beginning. A 
path may be circular or meandering, and its end may be near or 
the same as its beginning.Paths and roads, ways and journeys originate in the physical 
world, but from time immemorial, they have been internalized in 
humanity's deepest experience of itself. Of all the inner paths in 
the world, the ones that are well documented and well traveled, 
there are a few we want to share with you, because each in its own 
way gives useful insights into the paths in tarot.All of these are spiritual paths in one way or another. Their 
common essence is that they all point to some version of escape 
from the dilemma of the suffering small self in the great world, and 
they all lead, at the very least, to magnificent self-improvement and 
refinement. We'll start in the East and work our way westward.
The Noble Eightfold Path of BuddhismOne of the most famous of all spiritual paths is actually a manifold 
of several aspects. The Buddhist Noble Eightfold Path cuts across 
the landscape of Buddha's Four Noble Truths-which are actually 
kind of depressing at first glance. We'll give you the list, and you can 
see for yourself-i. Life means suffering.2. The origin of suffering is attachment.3. The cessation of suffering is attainable.4. The path to the cessation of suffering is the 
Eightfold Path.Needless to say, the landscape of the Four Noble Truths deserves a 
lengthy explanation, but we can only give you a glimpse of it here. 
The origin of suffering is said to be attachment to transient things, 
and all things in this world are said to be transient. This includes 
not only physical things but also ideas and all the objects of our perception. The essence of suffering is contained in two words: craving 
and clinging. With a little bit of thought, anyone can apply this idea 
to their own life. The themes of craving and clinging, in one way or 
another, appear in most tarot readings.The Eightfold Path is Buddhism's answer to the dilemma of its 
Four Noble Truths. The eight parts of this path are as follows:i. Right View2. Right Intention3. Right Speech4. Right Action5. Right Livelihood
6. Right Effort7. Right Mindfulness8. Right ConcentrationThe Noble Eightfold Path is a practical guide to personal freedom 
from attachments and delusions. Together with the Four Noble 
Truths it is the essence of Buddhism. Here is a brief explanation of 
the eight aspects of this path, which you can probably apply to your 
own life or the lives of your querents.The first aspect is Right View, and it means to see and understand things as they really are and to realize the Four Noble Truths. 
It means to grasp the impermanence and imperfectness of the world 
of objects and concepts. The things you have won't last all that long, 
and maybe the things you want aren't all that great.The second aspect is Right Intention, the commitment to ethical 
and mental self-improvement. Buddha names three types of right 
intention:a. the intention to renounce desire,b. the intention of good will,c. the intention to do no harm.The third path is Right Speech, which Buddha explains as follows:a. to abstain from falsehood,b. to abstain from slander,c. to abstain from offensive and hurtful words,d. to abstain from idle chatter.The fourth aspect is called Right Action, which involves the body. 
Unwholesome physical actions are said to lead to unsound states of mind, while wholesome actions lead to sound states of mind. Right 
Action means:
a. to abstain from taking life (including your own)don't kill anything;b. to abstain from taking what is not freely givendon't steal, leach, or extort;c. to abstain from self-indulgence-in food, drink, 
sex, drugs, etc.The fifth aspect is Right Livelihood, which means that one should 
earn one's living in a righteous, legal, and peaceful way. The Buddha 
mentions four specific activities that harm other beings and that 
should be avoided:a. dealing in weapons,b. dealing in living beings such as slave trade and 
prostitution,c. working in meat production and butchery,d. selling intoxicants and poisons, such as alcohol and 
drugs.The sixth aspect is Right Effort, which is an act of will without which 
nothing positive can be achieved. Right Effort is described as four 
acts of mental discipline:a. prevent the acquisition of bad habits,b. abandon the bad habits you already have,c. acquire good habits,d. maintain and perfect good habits and qualities you 
already have.
Right Mindfulness is the seventh aspect, and it's the one Wald is particularly drawn to. It is the ability to see things without distortion. 
What we think we know begins with an impression induced by a 
sense perception. We take this impression and instantly conceptualize and interpret it. The mind then joins concepts into constructs 
and weaves those constructs into elaborate interpretative schemes. 
All this happens much faster than conscious thought, and the result 
is that what we actually see is obscured by an impenetrable web 
of interpretation. Right Mindfulness is a clear perception that dissolves this interpretive net and allows us to see what's behind it. 
This process is crucial but very hard to learn.The last aspect of the Eightfold Path is Right Concentration, 
which is simply one-pointedness of mind. With training, the mind 
learns to focus, to intensify, and finally to sustain concentration on 
a chosen act or object to achieve a clear and fruitful vision. Easy to 
say, very hard to do.Obviously, this is only the most skeletal description of a set of 
practices that may take a dedicated Buddhist a lifetime to learn. 
Following the Eightfold Path creates tremendous mental and spiritual refinement even if it isn't traveled to the end. Taken all the way, 
it leads ultimately to Nirvana.We spent quite a bit of time talking about this particular path 
because it gives in detail the essence of the same practical goal of 
what in the West is commonly called the Path of Ascent. It explicitly describes the world as a place of suffering we would all be well 
advised to escape, and it gives a way to make this happen through a 
step-by-step program of spiritual discipline and elevation.The Great Path of ReturnThere is a parallel and contemporary tradition in the culture of 
India that is called the Great Path of Return, the path of yogis, saints, and sages. It is a path that takes the traveler deeper and 
deeper inward. It is the path that leads to the heart and finally to 
enlightenment at the center of the seeker's very own self.
Yogis specialize in refining the original physical condition 
through controlling and manipulating the current of life energy 
known as prana, or breath, and the energy known as kundalini, 
which rises from the lowest chakra at the base of the spine to the 
crown chakra at the top of the head. This is a physical path of ascent 
that seeks to enter the subtle dimension of divine light.The Indian saints bypass energy manipulation, including controlling kundalini, and begin with concentration on the internal sound 
and light of the subtle dimension behind the brows. The path of the 
saints is unconcerned with improving bodily karma, since its goal is to 
move completely beyond the level of physical existence. Experience 
on this path begins with the sublime and goes deeper from there.Finally, there's the causal path, the path of the sages. They go 
straight to the dimension of manifest consciousness without either 
subtle or physical experiences. This path is an intense enquiry directly 
into the nature of consciousness itself, without manipulating energies 
of any kind in either the mind or body. The sages' focus is on consciousness before any manifestation, in its first modification as the 
separate self-sense, the ego-"I." This is a path of pure transcendent 
meditation and contemplation-the highest, most abstract, most 
demanding, and most inward of the Indian paths of return, and its 
experiences are said to be beyond description.What all of these paths have in common that they look for the 
essence concealed in appearances. The goal of all these paths is to 
arrive at the heart, the intuitive center of consciousness. This is 
called realization.Every form and appearance, every feeling and perception, every 
thought, every vision, everything experienced above, beyond, or 
within, is said to appear first in the heart and then as the play of 
manifestation.
This direct intuition of the heart dissolves all the limitations 
of the sense of self, puts an end to all the suffering induced by 
limitation, and achieves a state of perfect enjoyment and serenity 
unaffected by any manifestation whatsoever. The achievement of 
such a state would clearly do away with any need for a tarot reading, but until then, tarot is a path that can actually help a person 
move in this direction.The Path of AscentIn the Middle East and the Mediterranean, the path from suffering 
in the world to elevated states of serene consciousness is called 
the Path of Ascent. With variations, it runs through Hermeticism, 
which is a Hellenized version of the Egyptian mysteries, as well as 
through early esoteric Christianity, Gnosticism, and Judaism. In its 
own way, each of these systems used the Path of Ascent for the same 
reason as their Indian counterpart: to escape inward to the center 
of being from the periphery. Their goal was to move through and 
past the obvious misery of worldly existence-what Christianity 
calls the vale of tears, what alchemy calls the gross primal material, 
what Gnostics saw as a kind of evil joke of the divine demiurge, and 
what certain aspects of Greek philosophy saw as the very bottom 
rung of the ladder of consciousness.Rosicrucianism, Ceremonial Magick, Qabalah (both Jewish and 
Hermetic), Freemasonry, and later groups like the Golden Dawn 
all built on this earlier foundation. In all of these Western forms, a 
well-beaten path of practices like prayer, celibacy, and the induced 
visions of guided meditation could be followed by any seeker who 
wanted to move toward elevation and perfection. All the things we 
said earlier about paths as distinct from roads, ways, and journeys 
can be applied here.
But they all tended to give it a Western spin, changing the 
direction of the path from inward to upward, from an immanent 
deity to a transcendent one. The difference between immanent and 
transcendent is important philosophically, but they are the same 
path at their root.The paths of tarot are no exception to these principles, although 
beyond a certain point, even the clearest path can give out. Familiar 
ground may turn into a trackless expanse, at which point a path 
becomes a way. Here, books and records and esoteric orders and 
communities can be of no further assistance to the traveler. Until 
this point is reached, if ever, tarot as a whole is a path as worthy as 
any ever traveled.Of all the versions of the Western path of ascent, Hermetic 
Qabalah, embedded deepest in tarot lore, remains clear and can 
be followed to the greatest distance in the form of the paths of the 
Tree of Life. Those who have gone that way before say it is highly 
unlikely that the paths of the Tree will exhaust themselves before 
the traveler reaches the end of his or her energy.This is the root of the intention and value of what, in tarot, is 
known as pathworking. Although this term also has a place in modern Neo-Pagan and shamanic practice, it is purely Qabalistic in the 
universe of tarot. Even pathworking is only one part of the path of 
tarot and not the one you can see in the cards.Whatever is cultural form, the spiritual impulse that sets a 
person on a path exists in everyone, although it is stronger in 
some than in others. When a pictured path in a card catches your 
attention in a reading, it suggests the inner need to act on that 
impulse in some way.This can take the form of a deep desire for inner refinement 
and improvement. There could be a desire for a return to an early 
and familiar spirituality or for the beginning of a new and attractive path, spiritual or otherwise. It suggests the desire to move inward 
and upward or perhaps the urge to experiment with a new and very 
significant change in lifestyle beyond anything that has been experienced up to now.
This is true in general, no matter which card with a path in it 
you're looking at, although each specific path has its own variation 
on the theme.8 of PentaclesLet's look first at the path in the 8 of Pentacles, between the foreground figure and the 
background city. This is path of the Freemason, 
although it doesn't necessarily involve Freemasonry at all. You must travel whatever path you 
have chosen step by step in an orderly and prescribed fashion, until you experience its mysteries in full and become what you are destined 
to become. The path is long, well trodden, and 
deeply satisfying to those inclined to travel 
it. It suggests discipline, effort, learning, and, 
ultimately, faith in what lies beyond it. And it 
guarantees the traveler, at the very least, a level 
of knowledge, understanding, and character far 
beyond the norm.
Ace of PentaclesNext, we'll look at the path in the Ace of 
Pentacles, which takes the traveller from his 
or her own involvement deep in the ordinary 
world back toward the heights from which it 
came. What is important about this path is that 
what it leads to can only be guessed at, but it 
promises fabulous experiences along the way 
and a view of ultimate mysteries at the end. 
According to tarot, this is a path of awakening 
that everyone will feel drawn to follow sooner 
or later.The MoonThen we come to The Moon in the Major 
Arcana, which shows the path as an offer we 
can't refuse-the slow, perilous, necessary path 
of personal evolution. In the foreground are the 
difficulties we know and can predict. Further 
out is the vague and fearsome unknown, extending almost forever to the edges of consciousness. 
We don't choose this path; it chooses us, and we 
intuitively suspect we'll have to travel it to the 
end. It runs from the depths to the heights and 
promises us a reward equal to the difficulty of 
the journey.
TemperanceFinally, we reach the card ofTemperance, where, 
after a tremendous amount of testing and 
strengthening, we are shown a path straight to 
glory, which we have earned the right to travel. 
This path seems to end just before it reaches 
the radiance that all inner paths seek. Beyond 
this ending there are no paths, no ways, no 
roads, no journeys. Beyond this point, nothing 
is left of the ordinary. The traveler, and his or 
her path, pass beyond description. This is as far 
as tarot can take you.On all four of these pictured paths, travelers may well experience 
in their daily lives some aspects of the crown, the pillars, and the 
rose and the lily that we talked about in chapter one. The aspects 
of the crown, pillars, and rose and lily may also suggest issues and 
practices that arise on the paths of other traditions we have mentioned in this lesson, such as right livelihood, right effort, study 
and learning, prayer, and the enjoyment of traveling rather than 
focus on a goal. It is the purpose of the paths of tarot to bring us 
to these experiences.When your attention is caught by a path in a reading, be aware 
of it as a beckoning, a seduction, a chance your querents can take, 
which may lead to experiences beyond anything they may have known before. Such experiences may or may not be spiritual, but 
they will be highly unusual and deeply satisfying. All that's needed 
is willingness, and the courage and resources will be supplied.
I want to bring this class to an end with my favorite quote about 
paths, which comes from Carlos Castaneda. His teacher tells him:Anything is one of a million paths. Therefore, a warrior 
must always keep in mind that a path is only a path; if he 
feels that he should not follow it, he must not stay with 
it under any conditions. His decision to keep on that 
path or to leave it must be free of fear or ambition. He 
must look at every path closely and deliberately. There is 
a question that a warrior has to ask, mandatorily: "Does 
this path have a heart?"All paths are the same, they lead nowhere. However 
a path without a heart is never enjoyable. On the other 
hand, a path with heart is easy-it does not make a warrior 
work at liking it; it makes for a joyful journey; as long as a 
man follows it, he is one with it. 
=== FILE_021 ===
MOUNTAINSWelcome to our class on the image of the mountain in tarot. 
Mountains appear in at least twenty-five cards, of which we will 
discuss seven in class-the io of Swords, Judgement, The Moon, 
The Tower, Temperance, The Hermit, and The Lovers.We're going to give you the end of the class first, like dessert 
before the vegetables, because we want this impression to be the 
first and most lasting.The single most important thing to know about mountains is 
that they reach beyond the ordinary, and their presence lifts our consciousness above the ordinary even when they are far away. Up 
close, they don't just reach beyond the ordinary, they annihilate it, 
and they annihilate the ordinary in us as well.
But smallness is not just vaporized. It's replaced. At the top of 
a high mountain, a human being is released into the perspective of 
the roof of the world. The mountain's height becomes the person's 
height. All of the mountain's immensity enters the senses and transforms the consciousness of the beholder.Beauty, strangeness, barrenness, utter extremes, and a spontaneous sense of the sacred; wind, ice, rock; cold and thinness and 
clarity of air; immense distances, spectacular colors, sudden engulfing storms; utter disinterest in the needs, or even in the existence, 
of life-all these are the hallmarks of a mountain peak's impact on 
human awareness.In an environment as extreme, as magnificent, as deadly as 
this, a human being can survive for only a short while and even 
then only with the help of extraordinary skills, endurance, and 
strength. Simply to reach such an environment can be the ultimate test of personal strengths and weaknesses. Just to draw its 
experience into lungs, eyes, and heart is enough of a reason to 
undergo the effort and to take the risk to achieve it.This is the essence of the mountain's meaning in tarot, although 
there are other less important issues connected with mountains in 
general and tarot mountains in particular. We need to know and 
understand these too, if we are to make the best intuitive use of 
mountains as a symbol.In tarot, as in the world, mountains come singly, in pairs, and in 
ranges. But however they appear, if they're in your neighborhood, 
you have to deal with them. The most obvious characteristic of 
mountains is that, more than anything else, they totally dominate 
your vision. You can't miss them.
Mountains serve seven main functions for human beings. 
They are:i. landmarks2. boundaries3. barriers4. challenges5. fortresses6. retreats7. habitable landscapesMountains may be observed, approached, climbed, passed over or 
through, dwelt on or dwelt within.They are home to divinities of all sorts and cultures-mythical 
beings like trolls, ogres, gnomes, and dragons; seekers of wisdom 
and solitude, like recluses, monks, sages, and prophets; and a whole 
variety of outlaws, revolutionaries, robber barons, and adventurers, 
both secular and spiritual. And, of course, there are just plain folk 
who like to live there.Tall mountains induce awe, worship, spontaneous ecstasy, and 
a sense of simultaneous elevation and separation. They annihilate 
self-importance and the small concerns of everyday life. There is 
no sense that a human being, or, for that matter, any living thing, 
belongs here. High peaks are barren, lifeless, often brilliant with 
snow and ice.Mountains test your strengths, reveal your weaknesses, protect and hide you, elevate, separate, and purify you. They give you 
a locale for your sacred stories and fairy tales and a symbol for your 
purest endeavors, highest goals, and greatest efforts.If this were a six-week course of three-hour days and five-day 
weeks, and we could spend all that time together just on this 
one image of the mountain, at the end of that time I believe we would all be changed forever. We would need a six-week course to 
fully discuss all the things we have mentioned about mountains 
so far.
Earlier, we said that mountains in tarot come individually and 
in ranges and pairs. As usual with tarot imagery, they mean different 
things in different cards. Since there are so many of them, we'll look 
at just a few of the more interesting ones.There are, as we mentioned before, at least twenty-five cards 
that have mountains in them in some form and possibly more. 
We say possibly because sometimes there is only the barest visual 
hint, and it's hard to tell if you're seeing a mountain or not. The 
seven we'll briefly mention are the most prominent or most representative of a mountain issue. Six of these are Majors and one 
is a Minor.10 of SwordsLet's begin with the mountains in the io of 
Swords. Their message is simple. They are as 
far as the eye can see. They are the edge of 
what you can know. What's beyond them is 
anybody's guess and will always be a mystery. 
This use of a mountain range as the symbol 
of a boundary or limit is a theme repeated in 
several other cards.
JudgementNow let's look at Judgement. The mountains here 
are solid ice, as harsh an environment as you can 
get. But the symbolism is pure Qabalah. Remember 
that every tarot trump is a path on the Tree of Life, 
and this is one of the first paths that leads up and 
out of the ordinary world. Its destination is a place 
of ice-cold intelligence where the laws of nature 
are made. It's a place of mind but not heart, a very 
lofty and rigorous landscape, not intended to provide the least bit of comfort or safety.But the path of Judgement is a path of fire that 
keeps the traveler warm enough to live even in such 
a place and pass beyond it into the unknown. The 
mountains ofJudgement are the goal of the experience of awakening, and you go there because they 
hold crucial knowledge you need to learn.The MoonNext are the mountains of The Moon. They are far 
away at the end of a long and scary path you have 
to travel, but they are what make the trip worthwhile. Those mountains are the symbol of the treasure and blessing of growing up, of full maturity. At 
the top of those mountains stands the peak of The 
Hermit, intimately joined to the path of The Moon 
in a birth card pairing, promising you the achievement of your highest goals. The mountains of The 
Moon are a symbol of ultimate reward for patience, 
effort, determination, and courage.
The TowerThe mountains in judgement were tough and so 
is the forbidding mountain peak of The Tower. 
Here, the mountain is literally a peak experience. 
This is the absolute highest point you can reach as 
a natural physical and psychological human being. 
It is the symbol of the roof of the natural world. 
And, of course, on the roof is the lightning rod of 
an ambition to reach beyond the limits of nature. 
But beyond this point, you run the almost certain 
risk of being struck down by the deadly storms of 
unknown forces. You can't stop here, but you can't 
go on as you are. This mountain demands that 
something major in you has to change.TemperanceMoving upward on the path of ascent, assuming 
you got past the lightning bolts at the roof of the 
natural world, you enter the world of spirit on the 
path of Temperance. Before you even get settled 
in your newly elevated spiritual condition, you see 
in the far distance of Temperance the twin peaks 
of a condition beyond even the spiritual. These 
are the two transcendent pillars of Wisdom and 
Understanding leading straight to the experience 
of Glory, which crowns the Tree of Life.Here, the mountains are a statement that you 
have already come farther than you ever dreamed, 
that this is not a time to rest but to keep moving, that you have the strength to finish what you 
began a long time ago.
The HermitIn The Hermit, another peak has been reached, 
and the spirit now stands beneath the open sky 
with nothing beyond but the endless vastness of 
transcendent space. This is the final accomplishment of the spirit: to have arrived where nothing is visible beyond what you have achieved. 
This mountain peak is the place where spirit and 
transcendence touch, far above even the imagination of the natural world where you began 
your journey in the landscape of The Moon. You 
have gone as far as effort can carry you. Beyond 
this point, you cannot go without the help of a 
higher power.The LoversWe'll end the journey of this particular lesson 
with the single mountain in the landscape of 
The Lovers. It rises to meet a welcoming archangel, who brings the battle of the sexes, all 
the endless oppositions of the masculine and 
feminine pillars, to a resolution in an orgasm 
of union. It is the final act of healing, and the 
mountain is the experience of coming home at 
last.
The mountains we have looked at in this class are only a few of the 
mountain experiences in the deck, but they give you an idea of the 
scope and importance of the image of the mountain in tarot.Each example describes an experience of climbing, each to a 
higher place than the one before it. Together, they beg the question "What do I do with this information in a reading?" But that 
question lives on the surface of a deeper issue, which needs to be 
addressed before the question itself can be answered. And that 
brings us to the closing of this class.We want to end by reminding you of where we began, with the 
awareness of the mountain as a symbol of transcendent personal 
experience, of the human condition in an extraordinary rather than 
an ordinary state.Tarot is normally used as a tool for dealing with the ordinary 
events of ordinary life, all-important to people in an ordinary 
state. This covers most people and most happenings most of the 
time. But one of the problems that tarot faces is that many who 
study and use tarot concern themselves with nothing else. Their 
interest and faith is in the small and practical. That is how they 
see themselves, others, and the world. They know theoretically 
that there's more to the world than the ordinary human condition, but that is such a remote consideration for them that they 
are not inclined to bother with it.Mountains are a symbol of what is extraordinary, what is beyond 
the normal in all things, and they appear in more cards than perhaps 
any other image in tarot. This is a reminder that the vast, the sacred, 
the awesome, the mighty, the unknown, and the transcendent are a 
part of the natural human condition as often as not.It's a good idea to be aware that any reading may ascend to the 
extraordinary at any time without notice. It is also good to know 
that, as a reader (if you know how), you have the option of offering your querent the gift of the extraordinary for the taking. In our 
opinion, this is the final lesson of the mountain in tarot. We'll get a 
chance to discuss some of the down-to-earth lessons of the mountain in the integration class at the end of this series.
 
=== FILE_022 ===
CROSSESWelcome to our class on crosses in tarot. Crosses appear in the 
following cards: The High Priestess, The Empress, The Emperor, 
The Hierophant, The Hanged Man, Death, Judgement, the Ace of 
Cups, the 6 of Cups, and the 3 of Pentacles.As you know, our last two classes were on the symbols of the 
path and the mountain, and those two have a couple of things in 
common. First, they are both natural forms found in natural landscapes. Mountains are made out of the movements of the earth's 
crust, and paths are made by the movement of living feet over the 
earth's surface.They are also alike because their naturalness is a complete contrast with the image of the cross, which springs straight out of the 
human mind. If there is one symbol of distilled human consciousness, the cross is it.Why, it has been asked from ancient times, did the chicken 
cross the road? When Caesar crossed the Rubicon, Rome changed 
forever. Romeo and Juliet were star-crossed lovers, the model of 
romantic love for the whole world. The Voodoo god Elegua and 
Greek goddess Hecate are deities in charge of crossroads, where 
all-important decisions are made. The most hidden personal truths 
and motives are uncovered by cross-examination. Perfect strangers become important to each other when their paths cross. To 
cross the ocean is to go as far as one can physically go in this world. 
When two people cross swords, a battle is joined. A double-cross is 
the essence of treachery.
When a cross is tilted, it becomes an X. An X in a box signifies 
that a choice has been made. An X on a signature line is a universal 
sign of human identity, and X marks the spot on every map of buried 
treasure.In language, the cross is a super-rich symbol of human relationships. But a graphic cross carries us into the abstract universe of 
mathematics, logic, and philosophy. And that's before we even get 
to spirituality. We'll touch on some of that here, though it will have 
to be just a touch because we know very close to nothing about 
the subjects mentioned above. Even so, there are some interesting 
ideas we can look at that can be useful in tarot.The Cross as a GraphicThe whole idea of a cross is the absolute contrast of opposites. 
Graphically, a cross is drawn as the intersection of two lines moving 
in directions as totally different from each other as we can see or 
conceive. And this is the first and most important thing to remember about a cross in the context of tarot. It's just a picture of the 
meeting of two things that couldn't be more opposite. This is the 
image of opposites as a creative interaction, rather than as sterile 
parallels that never meet or as useless head-on collisions.The two directions of a cross are so radically different from each 
other that each one is experienced as a whole separate dimension. 
They literally make the first two dimensions of the space we all live 
in. The second important thing to remember about a cross is that it 
shows us a universe we could never get to from one perspective alone. 
It's a universe that lets us create on a whole new level, and it's often 
built out of the opposing energies of an irreconcilable argument.The third thing that a cross gives us is something else that 
one perspective alone doesn't contain. Where the two directions 
intersect is a point, a center, which has no dimension at all. But it serves a vital function. It is an infinite and eternal fountain, the 
source of the four arms of the cross, each of which arises and takes 
its energy from the center. To begin with, a cross is made of a simple 
pair of opposites. When the opposites cross, they make a pair of 
pairs, the double duality that is one of the deepest secrets of tarot. 
From the amazing fountainhead of its center, a cross generates all 
the complications of the world.
Just for fun, let's bring up something that you may never have 
thought of. When a cross spins on its center, perpendicular (at right 
angles) to its two original directions, it creates the third dimension of the world we all experience as physical space. This is a cross 
with three arms that extends in three totally different directions at 
once. The result is a world infinitely enriched by another absolute 
difference.Now imagine adding a fourth direction to the cross, perpendicular to the first three. This would be the addition of another 
absolute difference, another dimension. The theory has it that, for 
us, three dimensions are the most we can experience as a stable 
state, which we call space, and the fourth dimension is experienced 
as change, as the flow of time. The theory goes on to suggest that a 
being that lives in any stable perception experiences what is totally 
different from and just beyond that perception as change. Each part 
of our experience, both moving and still, is made of the intersection 
of directions, or possibilities, as different from each other as the 
universe is capable of making them.The lesson here is that a cross is the symbol of all that changes 
and all that stays the same. It is the relationship between the stable 
state of things as they are, represented by the horizontal line, and 
the dynamic state of things as they might become, represented by 
the vertical. It is the symbol of the creative potential of absolute 
difference.Now let's begin to draw these interesting abstractions down to 
the level of tarot.
The Cross in TarotSometimes, the cross functions more as four arms extending from 
a center than as two lines intersecting. In such a cross, all the arms 
have equal significance and so they are shown as having equal 
length. This is called an equal-armed cross. It suggests stability, the 
sum total of all there is, and it's a universal symbol of serenity.Sometimes a cross is made of the simple intersection of a vertical 
and horizontal line, giving more extension to the vertical line than to 
the horizontal and more length to one end of the vertical than to the 
other. It turns verticality from an equal partner in a stable universe 
into a force of dynamic change. This is what is called a Latin cross, 
the symbol of a particular spirituality, and it suggests dissatisfaction 
with things as they are and the need to improve them.There are examples of both kinds of cross in tarot.The High PriestessPerhaps the most famous cross in tarot is the 
equal-armed cross of The High Priestess. It 
combines Hermetic with Qabalistic tradition; 
it is rich in significance but simple to describe. 
It is the central secret of the guardian of secrets, 
and its place is over the priestess's heart.Its four arms contain all the secrets of the 
number four. It refers to all the fours of the 
natural world, like directions, seasons, moon 
phases, etc., and also to more hidden symbolism, like the Tetragrammaton and its four 
Hebrew letters. The whole world, and all of 
tarot, is said to spring from these and other 
sets of four.
There is more than one lesson in the cross of The High 
Priestess, but the most important is that each of the four arms 
is equal. North is as good as south, winter is as good as spring, 
old age serves as great a purpose as childhood. Pain and pleasure, 
fullness and emptiness, even life and death, are equal. A hard lesson to learn, but it's the one that brings serenity and balance into 
your life.The HierophantThe Hierophant has one of the more intriguing crosses in the deck. It is the papal triple 
cross, symbol of the three realms of spirit over 
which the Catholic Church presides. The first 
realm, which is symbolized by the lowest bar of 
the cross, is called the Church Militant. It converts, organizes, and leads the masses. It moves 
people into the fold and keeps them moving in 
the right direction.The second bar is for the Church Penitent, 
the world of angels and of souls waiting for 
birth or judgment. Here, the church teaches 
and forms the mind and spirit to make it worthy 
of its destiny.The third bar is for the Church Triumphant, 
realm of the archangels, heaven, and the reward of the virtuous.The same triple cross contains the hierarchy of the three 
Masonic degrees. The Entered Apprentice learns to live in harmony 
with his physical and social environment. The Fellowcraft refines 
his mind and spirit. The Master Mason strives to live in an elevated 
state of completion and serenity.
This vertical cross contrasts with the equal-armed cross of 
The High Priestess. The simple lesson of this cross is patience 
and effort. The highest condition or best state available to you 
is achieved step by step, in an orderly way, with persistent effort 
over time.6 of CupsAnother unusual cross appears in a heraldic field 
on the stone pedestal in the 6 of Cups. First, it 
is the tilted cross of St. Andrew, a martyr's cross. 
Second, it said to be the coat of arms of Johann 
Valentine Andreae, author of one of three primary Rosicrucian texts, The Chemical Wedding of 
Christian Rosenkreutz, which is a description of the 
alchemical sacrifice of the legendary founder of 
the Rosicrucian Order. And third, it is a reference 
to the esoteric title of the 6 of Cups, the Lord of 
Pleasure. It is the X that marks the spot that gives 
the greatest pleasure in any situation.In this reference, ecstasy is connected with 
martyrdom and sacrifice. The Qabalistic reference here is to the 6 of Cups as Beauty in the 
world of Creation, sometimes called the Christ 
center at the heart of the Tree of Life. The two messages for the 
tarot reader in this cross are first that the greatest pleasure and the 
greatest reward is in giving and second that the best thing to give is 
pleasure-spiritual, emotional, mental, or physical.
Finally, we'll talk about two related crosses that don't really look 
like crosses at all. But one is important for understanding tarot, and 
the other is important for understanding life itself.The Hanged ManThe Tau cross of The Hanged Man is the first 
of these. Tau is the Greek name for the letter T, 
and its importance comes from two factors. (It's 
odd, isn't it, how the number two keeps coming 
up when we talk about crosses?) First, in early 
Christianity, when the Latin cross was not yet 
the symbol of the Roman Church and the Greek 
cross was not yet the symbol of the Eastern 
Church, the true cross was said to be the Tau 
cross. And this is also for two reasons.First, this is the way crosses were actually 
constructed by the Romans for the purpose of 
execution, and it was what Jesus was crucified 
on. The long part, called the stipes, was set permanently in the ground. In difficult times and 
places in the Roman Empire, there were whole forests of these 
implanted verticals ready for use as needed. The crosspiece was called 
the patibulum. It weighed about ioo pounds, and the condemned 
person had to carry it himself to the place of execution-hence his 
name, the patibulatus.After the patibulatus carried the crosspiece of his cross out to 
the field of execution, he'd be attached to it with ropes or with nails. 
Then he'd be hauled up so that the patibulum could be fastened to the stipes. We usually think of the two pieces being nicely joined 
with each other to form the Latin cross shape. But the Roman army 
carpenters, who had hundreds and thousands of crosses to make, 
didn't bother with that kind of fancy carpentry. They just affixed a 
peg in the top of the stipes and bored a hole through the center of 
the patibulum that fit over the peg. That made it easy to assemble 
the cross in a single motion. The weight of the crossbeam and the 
crucified man held the cross together, resulting in a shape like the 
Greek letter Tau.
The second reason the true cross was said to be Tau shaped 
is that the Roman empress Helena is said to have found the true 
original cross, which was shaped like a Tau, buried under a temple 
of Aphrodite in Jerusalem. She supposedly had it shipped back to 
Rome, and splinters of this "true cross" were distributed as sacred 
relics to churches all over the empire. Skeptics point out that the 
combined amount of wood in those splinters would have made a 
cross big enough to sink the ship that carried it.The second factor that gives the Tau cross its importance is 
that the Hebrew letter for T, which is Tav, is the last letter of the 
Hebrew alphabet. It isn't T-shaped in Hebrew, but it is in Greek, 
and the Greek translation of the Old Testament is the foundation 
of formal Christianity, both east and west.Jesus was, therefore, crucified on what was seen as the shape 
of the final expression of Judaism, and he is said to have thereby 
reversed the fall of man and redeemed the world with his sacrifice. 
The Tau cross has come in this way to be seen as the symbol of 
redemption through the act of reversal. This whole idea is graphically suggested in The Hanged Man of tarot.The simple lesson here is that an impossible or unacceptable 
situation can be saved by reversing it, by seeing it from a whole new 
perspective. This corresponds with the idea that the second direction of a cross adds a new dimension to any situation and a new 
solution to any problem.
The EmperorFrom the intensity of the Tau cross of The 
Hanged Man we come to a very different sensibility in the Ankh of The Emperor.An Ankh is a Tau cross with a circle or loop 
above it. This is a very old and much venerated 
Egyptian symbol and actually comes long before 
the cross. It is a hieroglyphic picture of the 
masculine vertical line rising through the feminine 
horizon and being transformed into the immortal 
rising sun. The Ankh has always been an amulet of 
pharaohs and kings that brings life, health, happiness, and fortune to those who possess it. The 
lesson of the Ankh is that simple.The cross in all these cards has many levels of interpretation beyond 
the ones we've given, but sadly, we don't have room here to get past 
the surface. And of course there are all the other cards with crosses 
on them that we mentioned earlier, which we didn't even get to talk 
about at all.For now, it is enough to know that every cross in tarot opens 
a door not just to issues but to whole dimensions. All the inner 
languages and landscapes that together make tarot what it is are on 
the other side of just such doors, waiting for you to find them, open 
them, and walk through them.That sounds like both a simple and a difficult task and, for 
some, an attractive one.
To accomplish it, you just need to follow a path and climb a 
mountain. 
=== FILE_023 ===
INTEGRATION: 
PATHS, MOUNTAINS, AND CROSSES"Hello and welcome." Those first few words are, to us, the most 
pleasant and most important words to say and hear in any lesson: 
"Hello and welcome."This class is an integration of all that we have discussed together 
in the three lessons of this chapter. We stood together in a waterfall 
of information and ideas, but our experience has been that in a learning situation like this, we get wet but absorb little. An integration 
class is intended to let us soak in what we've heard, so that we can 
give it to others when they need to hear it in a reading and so that we 
have it for ourselves when we need it.In past lessons, we've talked about the wedding of above and 
below, the commitment to the best in ourselves; about initiation, 
the difference between outside and inside, and how transforming it 
is to make the passage from one to the other through the process 
of learning; and about discovering the beauty and pleasure to be 
found on the path that lies between the two sides of an argument. 
All these things are learned from the images of the crowns, the pillars, and the rose and the lily.Now we come to the path, the mountain, and the cross-all 
they have taught us and all we have to learn from them.In the first integration class we did together, we used the method 
of recapitulating the information from earlier classes at length. Your 
task was to read, make notes and comments, and remember.This time, we'll do it a little differently. It would give us the 
greatest pleasure and do you the most good to take a more active role in absorbing the lessons of the past three lessons. So we'll 
remind you briefly of the most important general issues of the 
images we've studied, but then it will be time for you to go inside to 
find a connection between the images and your own thoughts and 
experiences.
Here's a little secret about learning. It's a secret you may have 
heard before, but it bears repeating. To truly learn something 
and deeply possess it, you need to contemplate what you want to 
remember and understand.So, after a little discussion, each of us is going to do a little 
contemplation, and we'll see where that takes us. We think you'll be 
pleased with what happens.To begin with, you need to have in front of you the fourteen 
cards we've looked at in the last three lessons. They are:The High PriestessThe EmperorThe HierophantThe LoversThe HermitThe Hanged ManTemperanceThe TowerThe MoonJudgementAce of Pentacles8 of Pentacles6 of Cupsio of SwordsThe cards with paths are The Moon, Temperance, and the Ace and 
8 of Pentacles.
Mountains appear in The Lovers, The Hermit, Temperance, 
The Tower, The Moon, judgement, and the io of Swords.Crosses are in The High Priestess, The Emperor, The Hierophant, The Hanged Man, and the 6 of Cups.All together, they make a single powerful lesson.Each of us learns the lessons of the same cards in a different 
way. Another secret worth telling is that the world, and the things 
in it, are as you see them. The things we're about to say are the lessons for us in the cards we mentioned. Whether they are the same 
for you remains for you to discover.PathsThe path is a path for each of us alone, no matter how many have 
traveled it before us or will travel it after us. It is there for us to 
experience what it has to teach us, and any path we choose to 
explore may be good for a short time or a long one, depending 
on whether or not it is a path that has heart for us. And that, 
of course, is for each of us to decide alone. A path always offers, 
never demands, although to follow a path with heart may ask of us 
all that we have to give.MountainsMountains bear the message of the extravagant, the outsized, the 
superlative. Although individual mountains differ from each other 
as much as individual people, they all offer a goal, a challenge, a 
horizon, and a boundary. They all show us what we would look like, 
what life would be like, if we allowed ourselves to live the extraordinary instead of the ordinary. Mountains, unlike paths, are very demanding by their nature, and what they demand of us is that we 
live at the top of our game.
CrossesCrosses bring to us all the layers of suggestion that can be found 
in a good dictionary or thesaurus, and they all apply beautifully 
to the affairs of everyday life. The adventure of crossing a threshold, the challenge of crossing a line drawn in the sand, the consequences of choosing a direction at a crossroads, the delight in 
each other of star-crossed lovers, the weight of a cross one has to 
bear, the anticipation of treasure when X (another kind of cross) 
marks the spot on a map, the sense of decision when an X in a box 
marks an important choice. And, of course, the crosses of pantheism and the religions of transcendence are all-important symbols 
of personal spirituality.To all of these standard cultural references, add the cross's 
function of revealing dimensions, offering fresh perspectives, and 
opening up whole new possibilities for creativity, personal refinement, and spiritual elevation, and the cross becomes an amazing 
intuitive tool in a reading.These few reminders about the themes of the images should be 
enough to help you remember the specific variations in the different 
cards where they appear. And they will also serve as a springboard 
for the contemplation exercise we are about to do.
Symbol 
Contemplation
First, close your eyes, breathe, and relax.Surround yourself with darkness and let your mind rest.Empty your mind of thoughts in a casual and comfortable way, and float 
peacefully for a few moments.When you are ready, take a deep breath, open your eyes, but remain in 
a meditative state.Now look at the fourteen cards face up in front of you. Let your eye 
intuitively choose the seven cards that are most pleasing or make the 
greatest impact on you at this moment. Separate them and put the others aside, face down.Now look again at the seven cards you have chosen, and of these, choose 
the four that are the most important to you at this moment. Put the rest 
aside, face down.From the four remaining cards, pick one to contemplate and put the 
rest aside face down, but keep them where you can find them easily.Now look at the one card you have chosen from all the rest and focus 
on an image in that card that we have studied-a path, a mountain, or a 
cross.Let that image enter you consciousness. Close your eyes, bring the image 
to mind, and ask yourself, "What is the meaning and the importance to 
me of this path, mountain, or cross?"When you have asked yourself this question, listen for any answer that 
comes to you. The answer may come as a message you hear, see, or experience. Take a minute to do this, and remember any answer you 
receive.
The time has come to return and record your contemplation. Take 
a deep breath and, when you're ready, open your eyes. Now take a 
moment to write down what you have seen, heard, or experienced in 
your contemplation.We've heard it said, and our experience confirms it, that nothing 
bears fruit without contemplation. Make a note of the other three 
cards you chose from among all the rest and, in your own time, contemplate the appropriate image in each one. We promise you that 
the results will be rewarding. 
=== FILE_024 ===
SYMBOL SPREAD: 
CROSSROADS, PATH,AND MOUNTAINThis spread makes use of the concepts discussed in the classes on 
the crosses, paths, and mountains, and it is ideally suited for readings involving overcoming an obstacle or achieving a goal. The layout is made up of three separate parts-the Crossroads, consisting 
of four cards; the Path, consisting of four cards; and the Mountain, 
consisting of three cards.The CrossroadsTo begin, shuffle your deck and divide it into four piles. Next, keeping the cards face down, arrange the piles into the shape of an equalarmed cross with an open space in the center like this:
Turn over the top card of each pile and orient it so that the 
bottom of the card is at the center of the cross.Contemplate these four cards and choose the one whose energy 
best reflects the direction you wish to go at this time. It may be that 
this direction shows the most promise in helping you achieve a goal, 
or it may signify the lure of something important or mysterious.Indicate the card/direction you have chosen by turning the 
three other cards face down again.Leaving the card you have chosen face up in the Crossroads, 
take the cards out from under it and hold them. You will draw the 
rest of the cards from this portion of the deck.The PathTake four cards from the top of the little stack of cards you are 
holding and arrange them in a Path pattern to the right of the 
Crossroads. You can play with the shape of your path, but we suggest something like this:
The nature of this path can be external or internal. The cards 
may suggest actions to perform and things to consider or observe 
along the way. They might represent events you'll encounter and 
the best way to respond to them internally as you continue on your 
journey. The cards that make up the Path benefit from contemplation. Even when their message seems clear at first glance, their 
deeper meaning will often be revealed over time.The MountainThe Mountain is made of the next three cards in the stack. Place 
them at the end of the Path, two on the bottom and one on top, 
like this:The three cards describe the way to climb the Mountain of the 
goal you are reaching for or the obstacle you are striving to overcome. 
These cards will also give you hints as to the best approach to take.
Additional ConsiderationsIf your goal is not realistic or attainable at this time, the cards that 
compose the Crossroads will let you know. If none of the four cards 
present a clear or acceptable choice of direction, it would probably 
be best to wait awhile and try the reading again at another time.If more than one card looks good to you, chances are you'll find 
success more than one way. However, take the time to contemplate 
the cards and choose the direction that has the strongest pull.
 
=== FILE_025 ===
MOONS, STARS, POOLS
 
=== FILE_026 ===
MOONSWe should begin by telling you that we have a love affair with the 
moon. So this class will be more of a contemplation than a lesson, 
more personal and less formal than usual.From the ancient moment when consciousness first took 
human form, the moon, the sun, and the earth were felt inwardly 
as the family from which we sprang. They were the first and most 
universal of all symbols, and they may well have been the source 
of the human propensity to create symbols. In most places and 
times in human history they have been mother, father, and child, 
outwardly in nature and inwardly as our sense of ourselves.With very few exceptions, human beings have always seen the 
moon as feminine. Wherever and whenever nature is deified, the 
moon is the goddess. She is the woman in us all.
She rules the night and all that is dark within us. She rules 
the sea and all that is tidal within us. She rules time and all that 
changes within us. She rules the circle and all that repeats itself 
within us.Moon 
Contemplation
For a long moment, conjure the moon as she appears to you.Close your eyes, breathe, and relax. Surround yourself with darkness, 
and let all your thoughts and feelings dissolve into shadows. Rest in this 
darkness and float there for awhile.The time has come for the moon to rise in the night sky of your 
awareness. See her within you. Feel her light. Let it illumine the darkness inside you. For the next couple of minutes, look at, feel, know, and 
explore your inner moonlit landscape.The time has come to return.Let the moon move slowly downward in your inner night. Let darkness 
once again surround you, and rest there for a moment.Become aware of your surroundings. Flex your fingers and toes. Take 
two deep breaths, and when you're ready, open your eyes.Take a minute or two to write down your experience, and what it 
means to you.
All the things you have felt and seen and thought are personal. 
They are a quick first look at the moon as she lives inside of you. 
We began our class with this personal experience because one of 
the essential qualities of the moon is that she is personal. She is 
intimate and close, both in nature and as a symbol.But because she is and has always been an intimate experience 
of every human being, she has been written and thought about, 
described and objectified, as much as any object or experience in 
the totality of human awareness.The moon is the subject of poetry and science, religion and 
magic, love and madness. Each of these categories has its own 
characteristic vocabulary. Each is valid in its own way and has its 
own consequences for our lives.The moon is the nearest of heavenly bodies. It has therefore been 
the target of humanity's first successful attempt to leave the earth in 
a physical manner, using all the power of science and technology and 
all the courage of adventure and exploration. Reaching the physical 
moon has given us, for the first time in history, another place to stand. 
It could well be a quantum leap in our evolution as a species.Remember this when your eye is drawn to a moon in a card 
when you're doing a reading.In astrology, the moon is also the nearest of heavenly bodies, 
the most intimate of personal planets, the first and most exhaustively observed of the lights in the sky and in ourselves.In Qabalah, the moon is associated with the number nine 
in a series of ten. It is spiritually, as it is physically, the first step 
upward in the journey of human evolution, what in tarot is called 
the journey of return.For Freemasonry and alchemy, the moon is a full and essential 
partner in the division of life into its necessary polarities and also 
in the process of healing and spiritual and magical union, which is 
understood to be the goal of the human spirit.
These are also things to remember about the moon in a reading.The moon in poetry and drama, myth and psychology, is the 
face of the divine feminine-of romance, mystery, wisdom, and 
madness. It arouses and begets both the soft and the dark parts 
of our natures. Lovers and thieves, werewolves and witches, medicine men, madmen and midwives-all are children of the moon. 
In ancient times, the moon was the symbol and power of matriarchy, the rule of women before masculine energy conquered the 
world.The moon rules the night and the powers of the night. Her light 
is not her own, so it is indirect, indistinct, cool, and soft. To see by 
her light is to see in a mirror, by reflection, so nothing is certain. 
Distortion is always possible, mistakes are easily made, hard edges 
are banished, and shadows rule. Because of this, the Moon card in 
tarot is associated with deceit and delusion.The souls of the dead are said to reside in the moon, and those 
same souls are said to descend from the moon to take on new 
incarnations. All solid realities lose their substance by moonlight, 
and all shapes as yet unborn wait in the moon's realm for their turn 
to become fully manifest. Therefore, the moon is said to rule the 
astral plane, the place of ghosts, spirits, and dreams.Because of this, the moon is foremost among the celestial 
sources of magick. All magicians in all times and places have 
known and used the powers of the moon to perform magickal 
acts. In tarot, the appearance of the moon may signify a good time 
to do magick.We briefly discussed many things about the moon and many 
others have not even been mentioned because the subject is so 
large and space is limited. But in all that we've said so far, the moon 
has been talked about as though it were one thing-one object, 
recognizable, as most things are, by one appearance.
The fact is, as everyone knows, the moon has many aspects, 
and she changes, at least a little, every night. She becomes new, 
waxes, becomes full, wanes, and becomes dark every month. Her 
changes are endless but perfectly predictable and steady. Because 
of this she is the symbol of time as a circle. The Wheel of the 
Year and the seasons, the ebb and flow of the tides of the sea, the 
menstrual cycle of the whole female gender, the first and most 
enduring human calendar are all marked and predicted by the 
rhythmic changes of the moon's face.For this reason, the moon is a symbol of all that is psychic, of 
crystal balls, of tarot itself, and of women.The Moon in TarotIn the Rider-Waite-Smith tarot deck, the moon appears in: the 2 
of Swords, the 7 of Swords, the 8 of Cups, The High Priestess, The 
Hierophant, The Chariot, and The Moon.In the 2 and 7 of Swords and The Hierophant, the moon has a 
purely astrological significance, referring in each case to the astrological attributions of the cards.2 of Swords = Moon in Libra7 of Swords = Moon in AquariusThe I lierophant = Taurus (symbol composed of a combination of the sun's disk and the crescent moon)
The High PriestessThe moon in The High Priestess appears in her 
crown and at her feet. In her crown, it is a general symbol of the divine feminine and refers 
specifically to her triple role as Maiden, Mother, 
and Crone (waxing, full, and waning phases). It 
is also a reference to her esoteric title, Daughter 
of the Silver Star, and to her connection with 
the Egyptian goddess Hathor. The sickle moon 
at her feet is a reference to her other aspect 
as Christian Mary, the Stella Maris or Star of 
the Sea, depicted in iconic paintings as riding 
the boat of the moon across the sea. And of 
course, the astrological attribution of The High 
Priestess is the moon.The ChariotIn The Chariot, the waxing and waning crescent moons on the shoulders of the charioteer 
are symbols of equipoise, the perfect balance 
between alternating happiness and sadness, rise 
and fall, growth and decay.
8 of CupsThe 8 of Cups shows us the sun being eclipsed by 
the moon. This is a reference to its esoteric title, the 
Lord of Abandoned Success, with its implication of 
a necessary journey from light into darkness.The MoonIn the ultimate moon of tarot, the Moon card 
itself, it is shown in its disseminating phase just 
after full. In this phase, astrology tells us that the 
moon's energy is assimilative, evaluative, and innovative. It is, essentially, a learning moon, appropriate in this card to the experience of the path that 
lies ahead and to the goal of the mountains in the 
distance.
Regardless of the card and regardless of its phase, every appearance 
of the moon in tarot brings with it the gift of all its meanings 
and references, ready to the hand of the reader. The third eye is 
opened, the intuition is primed, and answers to questions arise of 
themselves.Astrology, Wicca, Qabalah, alchemy, mythology, psychology, 
poetry, history, science, and religion all contribute to the staggering quantity of lore about the moon. In the interests of time and 
sanity, this lesson has to stop here. But if you should become lost in 
fascination with this subject, you will have, if you wish, a very good 
life's work ahead of you to learn and understand it all. 
=== FILE_027 ===
STARSHello, and welcome to our class on stars. We won't be spending 
any time on actual stars-not physical ones-in this class. Insofar 
as physical equals real, we won't be discussing reality. The stars in 
tarot are entirely symbolic and appear nowhere but in the night sky 
of the imagination. In fact, not even there, if you're talking about 
normal imagination. Only in the imagination of esoteric symbol 
makers do these particular stars exist at all.But everything that catches and holds our attention in the 
physical world has its counterpart somewhere in our inner landscape. And it is in this way that the physical universe becomes our 
teacher.Before allowing ourselves to be influenced by the filter of 
the teaching of others, it's a good idea to look inside for our own 
meanings and interpretations. So for a few minutes, let's do a little 
stargazing in our own private universes. Let's see what they look 
like and find out if they mean anything to us personally.
Star 
Contemplation
Take a moment to turn off all the artificial light in your surroundings, and 
to eliminate as much inessential noise as possible.Take a comfortable position, one that you can maintain without fidgeting 
for five minutes.Close your eyes. Breathe and relax.Surround yourself with darkness and let your thoughts dissolve in that 
darkness.Let your emotions drift away into the shadows. Let physical sensations 
lose all importance, and let every desire fall away beyond remembering. 
Wrap yourself in peaceful, quiet darkness, and drift.The darkness becomes your own clear night sky, without moon or 
cloud. A star appears. Pay attention to it.You notice that more stars have appeared. Become very much aware 
of them.Ask yourself three questions:I.What are these stars?2. How do I feel about them?3.What do they mean to me?The time has come to return. The stars fade from view, and only the 
clear darkness of your own inner night remains. Rest peacefully there 
for a moment.Become aware of your surroundings.Wiggle your fingers and toes.Take 
two deep breaths, and when you're ready, open your eyes. Welcome 
back.Take a moment to restore some light to your surroundings. Do that 
now.
For the next couple of minutes write down your answers to these questions you asked yourself.When writing down a contemplation, the best 
method is to write continuously without internal editing until you feel 
you're finished.Try that now.Stars as SymbolsThere are, as we said earlier, physical, actual, real stars. There are, as 
you've just discovered, the personal stars of intuitive consciousness. 
Now we'll talk about stars as symbols. The essence of star symbolism is contained in three words-unreachable, innumerable, and 
unapproachable. The stars are far beyond our grasp, there are way 
more of them than we can count, and their power is so great that 
we cannot get close to them.When we view them from our natural distance, stars do have 
natural symbolic importance; we tend to associate them with light, 
both divine and benign. They are the lights of heaven. In some 
traditions, every star is an angel, and every human being is said to 
have one of these angels as a personal mentor and protector.Most people think of stars as both beautiful and benevolent. 
They make us feel peaceful and hopeful when we look at or think 
about them. This is why most readers interpret The Star card in 
tarot as meaning hope and good fortune.Because human ambition seems to be limitless, and stars are 
obviously so far beyond our grasp, they are the target of the most 
far-flung ambitions of practical and theoretical science. To aim for 
the stars is a popular description of any great personal aspiration. 
This element of intense aspiration is always potentially present 
when a star appears as a symbol. It is the essence of everything 
desirable and seemingly unreachable.All this is generally true of stars when we see them against the 
wide canvas of the sky and when they have no particular shape that catches our attention. But as symbols, they are most often found in 
other contexts and in very special shapes, and then they are radically different from everything we've just said.
The significance of a star as a symbol depends on its shape. 
In the esoteric universe, which includes tarot, stars are geometric 
shapes, regular arrangements of points or rays around a center. The 
significance of one of these magickal stars depends on how many 
points or rays it has. Generally, there are five-, six-, seven-, eight-, 
and nine-pointed stars that represent most of what esoteric tradition has to say about the subject. In the RWS tarot, you will only 
find five-, six- and eight-pointed stars, so we'll just talk about those. 
And of course, we'll need to be brief, as usual.THE PENTAGRAMThe five-pointed star, or pentagram, is the most 
universally recognized star shape. You'll see it most 
clearly in the Ace of Pentacles and find it in all the 
cards of the suit of Pentacles. It appears on the flags 
of nations all over the world. But more important 
for our purposes, it is a ubiquitous symbol of 
magick. In spiritual traditions, it can represent 
everything from the angelic to the demonic, and 
it plays a major role in the internal symbolism of 
esoteric orders like Freemasonry, Rosicrucianism, 
and the Golden Dawn.In these orders, as well as in alchemy and 
Qabalah, the pentagram is most important as the 
symbol of the microcosm, the world below in the 
magickal saying, `As above, so below" It is the stylized picture of the human form, with four limbs, a head, and a torso. 
It is the emblem of the primary Renaissance concept that "man is the measure of all things," and that may well be the absolute foundation statement of all of Western esotericism.
THE HEXAGRAMThe six-pointed star, or hexagram, is also known as the Star 
of David and the Seal of Solomon. As the Star of David, it is a 
relatively recent emblem of Judaism in the form of Zionism. As 
the Seal of Solomon, legend has it that it was engraved on the 
magickal ring worn by King Solomon and contained the secrets of 
Solomon's magickal powers.As you probably know, a hexagram is made of two interlaced 
triangles, one pointing upward and one downward. One triangle is 
the symbol of masculine fire and the other is the symbol of feminine 
water. The whole world is supposed to be made of the interaction of 
these two principles. The hexagram is the symbol of the macrocosm, 
the above in `As above, so below"These things are well known. But there are lots of interesting 
things that are less well known about this form of the star. Let me 
give you an example from alchemy.First, carefully draw a hexagram. Make it of two triangles, each 
about two inches on a side.Above the top point, write "Lead - Saturn."Below the bottom point, write "Silver - Moon."Label the top left point "Iron - Mars."The top right point is "Tin -Jupiter."The bottom right point is "Copper - Venus."The bottom left point is "Mercury - Mercury."In the center of the hexagram, write "Gold - Sun."Now draw the hexagram again in the same way.
Above the top point of your hexagram write "Fire."Write "Water" below the bottom point.In the angle between the two points on the right, 
write `Air."Between the two points on the left, write "Earth."Label the top right point of the hexagram "Hot."Label the top left point "Dry."Label the bottom left point "Cold."Label the bottom right point "Wet."In the Hermetic tradition, the hexagram is a symbol of the Great 
Work of human evolution. It is the seven metals as the essential 
quality of all material things, and it is the seven planets as the totality of the heavens. The center is the Sun and Gold, the symbolic 
state of perfection, surrounded by all less-than-perfect states.The Great Work of alchemy is the transmutation of all the fragmentary states of human consciousness, represented by the circle 
of less-than-perfect physical and spiritual qualities. And this is done 
by manipulating the four elements and their four alchemical properties. All of this is captured neatly by the simple picture of a sixpointed star.THE EIGHT POINTED STARThe eight-pointed star is the star of the spirit. In several traditions, 
there are seven rungs on a ladder that lead to heaven and a state 
of human perfection. One way of representing those rungs is as the 
seven planets of ancient astronomy, called the Wanderers because 
they are constantly moving. Each of these is a lesson to be learned and 
a step to be taken in spiritual evolution. When all this is completed, 
the eighth level of perfection, the level of the fixed and eternal stars 
of heaven, is reached.
The eight-pointed star is also the symbol of the morning and 
evening star (actually the planet Venus), said to be the most beautiful of all.The Stars in TarotLet's look at the cards where stars appear: The entire suit of 
Pentacles, The Devil, The Magician, The Empress, The Hermit, 
The Fool, The Star, and The Chariot.In tarot, the pentagram is the central symbol of the whole suit 
of Pentacles, associated with the element of earth as the final form 
of the microcosm, or the world of below. It appears in The Devil 
card in inverted form for two reasons. The first is to symbolize the 
carnality associated with the Devil by the Church. The second is a 
reference to the Knights Templar, who were accused of despising 
the cross as a symbol and worshiping the demon 
Baphomet, whose symbol was the inverted pentagram. It also appears as one of the suit symbols 
on the table of The Magician, showing his power 
over all the elements.The simple lesson of the pentagram in tarot 
is contained in one word-earth-and everything associated with it: wealth and possessions, 
health, and all appetites and sensations.The hexagram appears in two cards, The 
Empress and The Hermit. In both cases, the 
reference is Qabalistic. In The Empress's crown 
there are twelve stars, representing the entire 
zodiac said to be embedded in Wisdom, which 
is the beginning of her emergent path on the 
Tree of Life. In The Hermit, the hexagram in his 
lantern is the symbol of the light he creates by reaching the boundary between the world 
above and the world below at the top of his 
mountain. This boundary between above 
and below is the end of his path of return 
on the Tree of Life.
The simple lesson of the hexagram is 
wisdom and light.The eight-pointed star can be found in The 
Fool and The Star. In The Fool, the twelve 
stars on his tunic infuse the perfection of 
the eight-pointed star into the twelve signs 
of the zodiac. In The Star card, the entire 
path of spiritual ascent, represented by the 
seven lower stars, is completed in the perfect beauty of the eighth star. The Star card is called the natural intelligence and represents the 
perfection at the heart of nature.
The simple lesson of the eight-pointed star is 
the feeling of beauty and perfection that rewards 
the completion of an inner journey.All three kinds of stars are in the canopy 
of The Chariot, which is a Masonic symbol. In 
Freemasonry, the starry canopy is the symbol of 
the whole universe-above and below, inside and 
outside, mystical and manifest-all of which is 
considered to be the scope of the work of an initiate. The stars in the canopy are also a reference 
to the esoteric title of The Chariot, The House of 
Influence, by which all good things are brought 
from above to below and from below to above.The simple lesson of the stars in The Chariot 
is that they represent the whole universe and all 
the good things in it.As with so many of the visual symbols of tarot, 
the star deserves a great deal more study and contemplation than we can give it here. Such a study 
would constitute a worthy journey, and it might 
well become your own inner journey to complete 
such a study over time.
 
=== FILE_028 ===
POOLSHello, and welcome to our class on pools, which appear in three 
cards-Temperance, The Star, and The Moon. These are natural 
pools, not constructed or modified by human intervention.This has been a particularly interesting image to develop into a 
class. In all the symbol dictionaries that we own, pools are not even 
mentioned. And in esoteric tarot literature, the references are few 
and not very helpful in everyday matters. But our instinct about the 
importance of the natural pool as a symbol remained strong. So, for 
lack of any detailed authoritative source, we looked inside ourselves 
to find what we were positive existed, and there, sure enough, was 
everything we needed. A portion of this class, then, can claim no 
other authority than intuition.Our first associations with the image of a pool are pure fun. 
When we were little, a pool was a place to play, to swim, and to get 
cool and clean. As we got older, the list of pleasures we associated 
with natural pools came to include reverie, meditation, and occasional romantic interludes in their peaceful presence. These were 
real pools and real experiences, not symbols.The first thing to know about the pool as a symbol is that, 
like the moon, it is purely feminine. No masculine attributes can 
be found in it. It is a container made of earth that holds water. 
Although pools in the physical world may vary, symbolic pools are 
deep, dark, reflective, and cold. They contain no light, no heat, 
and no air of their own. Pools are curved or irregular in shape, not 
straight edged or sharp. They welcome and frighten by turns. They 
are relatively small and intimate, not at all demanding, grand, or 
imposing.A pool may be fresh or stagnant, clear or murky, pure or poisoned. It may be old or newly formed, but the chances are it contains and nurtures life.
The surface of a pool is open and obvious, a place where things 
can float, suspended between the air and light of the world above 
and the dark watery world below. Its depths are full of mysteries 
and secrets and contain both life and death.Take a moment to see if this description fits your own observations and sensibilities.Now, the thing about any symbol, especially a purely feminine one, is that it is far better to know it through experience 
than through talk. You already know that anything in the physical 
world that catches and holds your attention takes up residence in 
your consciousness, lives inside you somewhere, whether you are 
aware of it or not. To enter your inner universe and find whatever 
you are looking for is a simple matter of technique. In a moment, 
we'll journey to the pool that exists within us all. This is not a tarot 
symbol. It is a part of our purely personal landscape, so the pool we 
discover will be different for each of us.Take a moment to turn off or dim your lights and get comfortable.Pool 
Journey
Close your eyes and surround yourself with darkness.Breathe and relax.Float for awhile without thought, feeling, or sensation. Drift and rest.You find yourself now in a stone room whose proportions are equal and 
whose shape is that of a cube.The room is square and as high as it is 
long and wide.The floor is cool, and you notice that your feet are bare.The room has a single door and no windows, although there is enough 
light to see by. Go to the door, open it, and step through.
You find yourself on the landing of a staircase that descends out of sight. 
Take a minute to observe and remember the landing.In a moment, you'll begin to descend the staircase.Do that now.As you descend step by step, pay attention to what you see and feel.You reach the bottom of the stairs and find yourself on a narrow beach. 
You can feel the sand under your feet.Directly in front of you is a body of water stretching away into the distance. A pier leads from the water's edge to a boat. See this clearly.Walk across the sand and along the pier to the boat. Go on board and 
take a minute to explore. Soon, this boat will begin to carry you across 
the water to an island, on which you will find the pool that awaits you.The boat moves away from the pier, and you begin your journey. Be 
completely aware as you travel. Remember everything.Ahead of you, an island appears. On your next breath, you reach it and 
step ashore.Explore the island until you find the pool that is hidden on it. Observe 
everything.When you reach the pool, sit beside it and rest.Now, if you wish, but only if you wish, disrobe and enter the pool.You 
have the ability to descend safely into the depths and experience complete and prolonged immersion.
For the next few minutes, be aware with all your senses and with your 
thoughts and feelings as well. Explore the waters in any way you wish. 
Let the experience affect you deeply.The time has come to emerge from the waters of the pool. Dry and 
dress if you need to, and then find a good place by the side of the pool 
to sit and meditate.Breathe and relax.You have traveled far and experienced much.Take some time to contemplate what you have seen and felt on your journey.When you feel ready to return, slowly become aware that you once 
again inhabit your familiar physical body and the place where your body 
is physically present. Wiggle your toes. Clench your fingers and relax 
them.Take two deep breaths, and, when you're ready, open your eyes but stay 
in a meditative state.Welcome back!Take a moment to restore some light to your surroundings.For the next few minutes, remember your experiences clearly and write 
down the most important parts of your journey. Pay special attention to 
your experience of the pool.
Everything that you observed and experienced is personal, and it 
exists within you to revisit whenever you wish. Your own awareness is the basin, and your journey is the water of the pool within 
you. Be aware that your journey is another name for the totality 
of your life experience. In this way, your physical body and the 
experience of life that animates it together form a great and mysterious pool.The Pools in TarotIn tarot, the pool has more specialized meanings, depending upon 
where you find it. These meanings are esoteric and concern themselves with the ceremonial magician's spiritual odyssey. Each pool 
is found in the landscape of a successively more elevated path on 
the Tree of Life. The pool in The Moon is the darkest and most 
melancholy. In The Star, the waters of the pool are much lighter 
and cleaner and represent an advance in personal evolution. The 
pool in Temperance is water at its clearest and coldest and is a big 
step upward and onward.
The MoonThe meaning of the pool in The Moon is relatively 
simple. The Moon card as a whole shows the first 
steps of personal evolution for the awakened 
spirit and the long path that lies ahead. The pool 
is the darkness of the dream of the personality 
asleep in the physical world. From the perspective 
of Ceremonial Magick, everyday life and all its 
concerns are considered to be the dark water and 
mud at the bottom of this pool. The crayfish is 
the primitive consciousness that rises out of the 
darkness of the water below into the light of the 
moon above to begin its long spiritual journey.The StarHere, too, the meaning of the pool is simple. It 
is the great pool of spiritual awareness that we 
explore by meditation in the hope of discovering our own innate perfection. The Star is called 
the natural intelligence, and it is understood that 
by traveling on this path of the Tree of Life, all of 
nature, including our own, can be perfected. But, 
of course, meditation requires effort, discipline, 
will, and desire. According to the magickal dictum 
that "man is the measure of all things," the message 
of the pool in The Star card is that the perfection 
of nature itself depends on the exercise of all these 
qualities in ourselves.
TemperanceTo understand the pool in Temperance, you need 
to know that it is half of a more complex symbol 
that is part Qabalah and part alchemy. This symbol is one of spiritual sexuality, a kind of Hermetic 
tantra, that invokes both masculine and feminine 
energies, but only in one person at a time.You will notice, if you look carefully at the card, 
that on the forehead of the Archangel Michael 
(the main figure in the foreground) there is a sun 
disk, a circle with a point in its center. The pool 
is at the bottom of the card, underneath his foot. 
The pool and the sun disk refer to the two ends of 
the path of Temperance on the Tree of Life-the 
lunar pool of Yesod below and the solar disk of 
Tiphereth above.The pool is the element of water and a symbol of pure feminine 
sexuality. The sun is the element of fire and a symbol of pure masculine sexuality They exist together in every human being, both separated and connected by the path of Temperance on the Tree of Life.It is said that by a kind of alchemical-spiritual masturbation, 
the pool and the sun, the water and the fire, the feminine and the 
masculine, are united in a vast vibratory orgasm that propels the 
seeker out of the physical state and into the spiritual one. This is 
the crucial breakthrough on the path of spiritual elevation, and it 
can only be achieved by using the rocket booster of sexual magick. 
If this fails, the seeker reaches his or her limit in the experience of 
The Tower. This is an interesting concept that needs a lot more 
explanation than we can give it here. By the way, the two cups that 
Michael is using to pour energy back and forth are a symbol of solitary sexual energy manipulation.
The thing to remember about the pool as a symbol is that it is a 
picture of ordinary life as the starting point for spiritual adventure 
and personal evolution. It can also be useful to remember the pool 
as a simple, pleasant, and beautiful part of nature.Reading 
Practice
As you can see, in tarot, the pool in every case is the official 
symbol of the beginning of a stage of personal evolution and 
elevation. This can be difficult to apply to the situations of 
everyday life, but it can done. Our suggestion is that in a reading you take what is useful in this symbolism and modify it to 
reflect the needs of the moment. When it's appropriate, or if 
you prefer, you can work with your own purely personal associations for the pool instead.One good way to learn how to do that is to put the symbolism of the pool in the context of some actual readings. Here are 
questions from three hypothetical querents for you to answer 
that will help to root the information and ideas in this lesson in 
actual practice.Personal 
Reading 
Style 
Evaluation
QUESTION # I : I'm a twenty-four-year old Iraq war veteran who 
is suffering severe post-traumatic stress disorder. I'm feeling lost, angry, 
depressed, and melancholy. The world seems like an awful place even 
when I watch kids playing ball outside my window. I can't connect 
with anybody, and I feel mean and violent a lot of times. Even with 
therapy and the support of my family who love me, I don't know what I 
should do. I came to you for a reading because I thought, "Who knows? 
Maybe the cards can help."You decide to do a one-card reading and you draw 
The Moon.What does the pool in the card tell you that can 
be helpful?
QUESTION #2: I am a forty-seven year old woman with a boring husband, two nice children, a career of my own, and a thoroughly 
respectable life. I've fallen in love with my parish priest. My question 
is, "What now?"You draw The Star for a one-card reading.What answer does the card, and specifically the 
pool in the card, have for your querent?QUESTION #3: I am a sixteen year old girl, and there's two really 
greatguys who say they love me. One is sweet and handsome and writes 
poetry and has the softest touch, and the other is strong and has a great 
body and does sports and is very exciting and fun to be with. They don't 
know about each other, and when I'm with one I feel like I'm cheating 
on the other, but I can't give either one up. Is this wrong. I don't know 
what to do.You draw Temperance for a one-card reading.What's your advice, based on the card in general 
and the pool in particular?These are intentionally complex and difficult questions to answer, 
but people often face such situations in their lives. The value of 
tarot is that it can always be counted on to give a useful perspective 
in any situation.
 
=== FILE_029 ===
INTEGRATION: 
MOONS, STARS, AND POOLSHello, and welcome to our integration class for moons, stars, and 
pools. These images appear in:Ace of Pentacles2 of Swords7 of Swords8 of CupsThe FoolThe MagicianThe High PriestessThe EmpressThe HierophantThe ChariotThe HermitTemperanceThe DevilThe StarThe MoonNormally, when we do an integration class, we begin with a 
reminder of the general sense of the images we have discussed. 
Then we do a brief recapitulation of the specific meanings of 
those images as they appear in different cards. We do this to help 
you remember the large amount of information we've covered in 
the last three classes.This time, we're going to approach the task of remembering 
and integration in a different way. Instead of hearing the information again, you're going to find out how much you remember without prompting. And then you'll have a chance to see if you can put what you've learned to use. We'll do all this in the simplest waywith questions.
Before we begin with the questions themselves, it's a good idea 
to point out that there is more than one kind and style of question 
one can ask about tarot meanings and symbols. Everyone is different and tends to be interested in and active on different levels, so 
the questions also tend to be on different levels.There are practical questions whose concern is everyday life. 
There are psychological and emotional questions that deal with 
very personal and internal things. Some people are fascinated with 
the esoteric and occult, and some have a tendency to be in love with 
broad philosophical and spiritual issues.The fact is, every tarot card and every image and symbol 
speaks to all of these kinds of questions simultaneously. So your 
job in this lesson is to remember, understand, and use what you 
have learned in a way that suits and interests you. It's useful to 
remember, though, that querents also differ in personal style, so 
you will want to be fluent in as many styles and on as many levels 
as you can absorb.Reading 
Practice
The first questions for you to answer, then, are:What level and style of issue is most comfortable for you?What kind of question do you answer best:• practical and useful• emotional and psychological• spiritual and philosophical• esoteric and abstract
Can you work comfortably in more than one of these areas?Is there one or more area that is definitely not your cup of tea?It's useful to be quite clear on your predilections and strengths, and 
to know where you are not strong or comfortable.Since our most recent classes were on moons, stars, and pools, 
the next question is:What do you remember about the general issues of• moons• stars• poolsThen ask:What specific meanings do these images have when they appear 
in different cards?Finally, ask:How and in what context is this information useful to you as a 
person and as a reader.Clear and complete answers to these questions will tell you what 
you've learned, even if the answer sometimes is "I don't know" You 
can use these questions, or variations on them, to measure your 
progress in grasping, remembering, and integrating the material of 
this course as it continues to unfold in classes to come.Before we get together again, take some time to ask and answer 
these questions for all the images we've studied in this course so far. 
You will find the process very helpful and very revealing.
 
=== FILE_030 ===
SYMBOL SPREAD: 
THE POOL, MOON, AND STARThis spread is based upon the symbols studied in our classes on 
pools, moons, and stars. It makes use of four cards, and although it 
is subtle, this is a strong spread and is particularly good for manifesting your dream or achieving an ambition. It is not a step-by-step 
instruction manual, but rather it should be considered a guide to 
some of the broader issues or considerations involved.The concept of this spread is a pool, which shows a shimmering 
surface as well as the depth of the water below. In the sky above, 
you see the moon and a bright star.Positions #i and #2 compose the pool, #3 is the moon, and 
#4 is the star. Please note that these are position names-not to be 
confused with the cards of The Moon and The Star. The positions 
should be filled with whichever cards are drawn.Position #i, the Dream card, is placed horizontally and is read 
as if upright.Position #2, the Hidden Potential card, is placed vertically 
beneath the Dream.
Position #3, the Moon, appears above the pool to the left.Position #4, the Star, appears above the pool to the right.The DreamThis horizontal card represents the shimmering surface of a pool, 
which reflects the object of your desire. This may be something 
you wish to have, be, or do. The card in this position will show you 
an aspect of your dream that you can already envision. You may 
approach this reading with something already in mind, or let the 
card suggest a dream for you to consider. It should always be read 
as if upright.Hidden PotentialBelow the surface of the pool are things you cannot see. The deep 
water contains your hidden potential-the matrix that forms the 
substance of your dream. You can think of it as a secret ingredient 
to your recipe for success. An upright card in this position is close 
to the surface and indicates that its energy can be used as soon as 
you are ready to make a commitment to your dream. A reversed 
card is deeper down and may indicate that you'll have to work a 
little harder to access this energy or that your dream requires a 
greater risk than you might think. This does not necessarily mean 
that you should abandon your dream-just that you'll have to dive 
a little deeper to find what you need.MoonAs the moon in the sky is constantly cycling through its phases, 
the card in this position represents something that must change. This could be a plan of action, timing, or an attitude shift. Read the 
card's upright or reversed orientation as you would in any reading 
to gain some insight into the nature of this change.
StarThe Star position, on the other hand, represents a stable forcewhat stays the same. If you have already been working to realize 
your dream, this card will tell you something you should keep on 
doing. If this is a new dream, it will describe the way in which you 
should remain steady. As before, consider the orientation of the 
card as you normally would.The Pool, Moon, and Star spread can be read quickly, but it is best 
done in a state of quiet contemplation, as if you were sitting by the 
edge of a pool under a beautiful night sky.
 
=== FILE_031 ===
HORSES, SUNS, BANNERS
 
=== FILE_032 ===
HORSESHello, and welcome to our class on horses in tarot. In the RiderWaite-Smith deck, horses appear in seven cards-the four Knights, 
Death, The Sun, and the 6 of Wands. In other decks, they can be 
found in other cards as well, most often in The Chariot.Wherever you find the image of a horse as a symbol, you find 
beauty, speed, power, nobility, and underlying all, freedom and a 
sense of distance. The horse as a symbol is magnificent.Now, right now, before we say any more .. .
The Journey 
of the Horse
Close your eyes. Breathe and relax. Surround yourself with darkness 
and rest.In a moment, a doorway will open in that darkness, and you will emerge 
into an unknown, wild, and endless landscape.This will happen on your 
next breath.Look down at your feet.You will not be surprised to find that you have 
four of them, all hooved.You have the form, the heart, the spirit of a 
horse. Become aware of yourself and the form you have taken.Take a 
minute to know the kind of horse that you are.Ahead of you lies the unknown. Enter it in your new form. Do there 
what you should do, go where you must go, and become what you must 
become. Only about fifteen minutes will pass according to the clock, but 
when you come back, you will have spent an eternal moment in another 
world as a another being.The time has come to return.Take a moment to say a proper farewell to 
the landscape of the horse.When you have done so, find your way back 
to the doorway by which you arrived.Soon you will step back through the portal between the worlds.When 
you do so, you will once again acquire your human form, and you will 
rest in the darkness that surrounds you.This will happen on your next 
breath.Become aware now of your normal environment. Wiggle your fingers 
and toes. Lightly stamp the ground or the floor beneath your feet three 
times.Take two deep breaths, and when you are ready, open your eyes.Now take some time to record the essence and most important parts 
of your experience on paper.
The horse is a part of symbol, myth, and legend across the face 
of the earth. Although it came later to some places than others, 
whenever and wherever the horse appeared, it entered the life and 
mythology of humanity in a deep and immediate way. Always, the 
horse became a god or goddess, or was said to be the child of a god 
or goddess, and was associated simultaneously with the underworld 
and with the heavens.From being its own wild, free, and beautiful creature, it became 
a servant of the gods in myth and of humanity on earth. It earned its 
way by pulling or carrying-chariots, carriages, wagons, and riders 
both human and divine. Horses pulled the chariot of the sun across 
the sky, carried divine and human warriors into battle, transported 
princesses to their royal weddings, and carried kings and emperors 
in procession. Conquerors on horseback swept across continents; 
jockeys to this day sweep around tracks in the quintessential human 
activity of the race. Horses have always been the treasured possessions and companions of hunters and travelers everywhere. And 
they were honored as the most valuable of sacrifices to the gods 
when sacrifice was needed.Horses are so much a part of human history and all its stories 
that they seem indispensable to, even inseparable from, humanity. 
Out of this intimacy, the myth of the centaur-half man and half 
horse-was born. In fact, the stories, myths, legends, and historical importance of horses are so manifold and so universal that they 
overburden the possibility of telling in such a short space as this 
lesson.For our purposes, it is enough to describe their symbolism in 
tarot. But description will be kept short, just enough to act as a 
springboard for experience. We have already had one experience of 
the horse, and there will be more before we're done. This is a symbol that gains more from being and doing than from telling.
In the seven cards that contain a horse, three are lunar horses, 
two are solar, and two are terrestrial.First in Asia, and later in Greece, the Middle East, and Europe, 
legend had it that the horse was created by the gods of earth and 
water. Horses arose from the depths, roamed the night, and were 
ruled by the moon. In time, the gods of air and sun laid claim to 
them as well. And horses carried the divinities and heroes of both 
above and below wherever they wished to go.But always, the horse is said to have a special affinity with the 
underworld and the souls of the dead. Dead souls know nothing of 
the landscape of that underworld, and horses, who know it intimately, 
are their guides. Heroes who guide their horses into and out of earthly 
adventures, reverse their roles when they need to enter the world of 
shades and shadows. Horses know the way and know the dangers, and 
they lead the heroes into and out of the realms of darkness.DeathThe horse in the Death card of tarot is such a 
guide. It is the horse who chooses the path and 
the pace, and Death is content to go where he 
is taken. Here, the horse is pale, ghostly, a being 
of the moon, of the night, and the underworld, 
although he is pictured as white in a clearly lit 
landscape.There are two keys to this picture: One is 
the sun, simultaneously setting and rising in 
the background, establishing the time as being 
between dusk and dawn. The other is the cliff, 
which establishes a landscape of life above and 
death below, with the horse, Death, and all the 
human figures in the underworld below.
Knight of CupsThe second lunar horse is found in the Knight of 
Cups, who travels on the mythic journey of the 
seeker of the grail. He is an adventurer who has 
brought his horse to the river that separates ordinary reality from the perilous and sacred landscape 
of the heart. From this point on, it is the horse 
who will guide the rider.Knight of PentaclesIn the imagery of the Knight of Pentacles the 
horse is black, the symbolic color of the earth from 
which it arose. It is already in its element here. 
It is standing still because it has arrived where it 
is supposed to be. It has brought the knight to 
the end of his journey. The journey of emergence 
is complete, and the journey of return awaits its 
beginning. To survive the journey of return, the 
Knight of Pentacles must remain surrendered 
to the power, the knowledge, and the will of his 
horse.
Knight of SwordsHere, the horse is truly white, a terrestrial being 
whose color is the color of purity, beauty, and 
nobility-qualities which he transmits to his rider. 
These qualities transform the Knight of Swords 
from a brute, a bully, and a killer into a warrior and 
a hero.Knight of WandsThe red horse of the Knight of Wands is a solar 
horse, whose quality is fire. As with the horse 
of the Knight of Swords, he imbues his rider 
with virtues, the godlike qualities of immediacy, 
certainty, fearlessness, and invulnerability.
6 of WandsHere again, we have the white terrestrial horse 
that carries his rider from the past into the present and toward the future in the world of human 
events. Because the intent of this card is to picture 
victory, the horse is white to symbolize nobility, 
triumph, and the mildness of perfect surrender to 
the rider's will.The SunThis is the quintessential solar horse, steed of the 
gods, worthy mount of the ultimate rider. Horse 
and rider are equal in virtue, purity, and nobility. 
Both are without blemish, perfect within and without, and they are in perfect harmony of direction 
and intent.These are the seven horses of tarot.
TheJourney 
of the Horse 
and Rider
We're about to begin another journey.Begin by spending two minutes carefully examining and memorizing the 
landscapes of the seven cards with horses, so that you can see them in 
detail when you close your eyes.Now close your eyes and see each landscape in your mind in vivid 
detail.Open your eyes and look at the cards again. Remember everything.At this point, take a moment to dim or extinguish the lights in your 
surroundings.Close your eyes once again. Surround yourself with darkness and rest.Once again, a doorway opens onto a landscape you do not know.You 
will enter that landscape on your next breath.You are a rider now, on one of the seven horses of tarot in the landscape of your chosen mount. Go forth into that landscape and guide or 
be guided by your horse to whatever awaits you there.It is time to return from whence you came.When you are done, return 
to the doorway between the worlds and wait. In a moment, you will 
dismount, move through the doorway into darkness, and rest.This will 
happen on your next breath.Become aware of your surroundings. Clench your fingers and toes, then 
relax them.Take two deep breaths, and when you are ready, open your eyes.Welcome back. Now take the time to record your experiences.
When a horse catches your attention in a reading, let it remind you 
that it is a symbol of the energy and style of a journey. Sometimes 
the journey is lunar and connected with the night, what a Jungian 
would call your shadow. Sometimes it is solar and connected with 
light and spirit. And sometimes it's terrestrial and concerned with 
adventures in daily life.• The pale horse of Death takes you through your own world of 
shades and shadows.• The horse of the Knight of Cups carries you across the river 
that separates the sacred from the ordinary, into the world of 
the heart.• The Knight of Pentacles sits astride the black horse of the 
earth, at the end of one journey and the beginning of another.• The heroic Knight of Swords rides his magnificent steed 
toward a glorious adventure.• The red horse of the Knight of Wands is ready to go wherever 
and whenever the spirit demands.• The mild and noble white horse in the 6 of Wands carries the 
worthy hero high above the crowd in a moment of glory.• The pure, perfect beauty of the white horse of The Sun carries 
its radiant rider forward to fulfill a happy destiny.In tarot, horse and rider are inseparable. The horse gives its rider its 
virtues and the power to move forward. The rider gives the horse direction and purpose. Together, they are always the central figures 
of a story-of a significant story or important chapter in the life of 
whoever comes to tarot for a reading.
 
=== FILE_033 ===
SUNSHello, and welcome to our class on the suns of tarot. Suns appear in 
seven cards-The Fool, The Hierophant, The Lovers, The Chariot, 
Death, Temperance, and The Sun.Suns, like moons and stars, change their meanings, references, 
and significance from card to card. You may remember from earlier 
classes that moons differ by their phases and stars by the number of 
their points or rays. For suns, the difference is found in what sky or 
heaven they appear in.There is an alchemical sun, a Qabalistic sun, a Masonic sun, an 
Egyptian sun, an astrological sun, a mythological sun, a psychological sun, and a scientific sun-all forms of what the mind makes of 
the observable sun in the sky.Each of these suns is fascinating in its own right. Each sheds 
light on ourselves and the world we live in. All of these suns are a 
large part of the answer to the questions of who we are and where 
we come from. We have only a few pages to look at these suns, and 
because space is limited, we will not be blinded by what we see. 
However, if we had unlimited pages, what there is to see would be 
dazzling.To mention moons and stars here is useful as a contrast, a 
background of difference against which suns can be measured. 
Moons and stars are fully defined by what they are: objects in the 
night sky. As objects, their significance ranges from that of physical bodies to that of spiritual entities, even deities. But whatever 
they are, they are.
Suns, however, although they are symbolic and physical objects, 
are also powers and sources of power. You could go so far as to say 
that they are the source of all the power there is.If you live physically, the sun is the ultimate source of your life's 
energy and being.If you live psychologically, the sun's power is the source and 
nature of your awareness.If you have a spiritual life, the sun is the radiant source and 
nature of your spirit. If anything, including yourself, exists at all in 
any form, it is the sun from which it springs and by whose power it 
continues.Were the sun on any level of being to be extinguished, all life 
and being on that level would be extinguished with it. This cannot 
be said of any other phenomenon in all the many worlds. So the one 
thing you will want to remember about suns among all the things 
that we discuss in this lesson is that the sun is power.For a moment, contemplate this statement. The sun is power. 
Can you validate that statement from your own experience, or do 
you question it?Now let's take some time to look at the sun through several 
different pairs of eyes.AstrologyThe sun of astrology is one planet among several that revolve around 
the center of personal consciousness. In modern times, although it 
may once have been different, the influence of the sun is in what is 
most visible of the individual it describes. In broad strokes, it shows 
what can be seen of a person on and close to the surface and what will 
influence that person's life in the most direct and immediate way. The 
symbol for the sun in astrology is a circle with a point in the center.
FreemasonryIn Freemasonry, the sun is half of the entire manifest universe. It is 
paired with the combination of moon and stars.The sun is the daylight half of things and symbol of all that 
can be associated with daylight. The composite symbol of moon 
and stars is the nighttime half of things and all that can be associated with the night. The sun and the moon and stars always appear 
together, never separately, since the whole manifest world is made 
up of both together. They are the basic reciprocal duality, and neither can exist without the other.In Freemasonry, the symbol of the sun is most often a full-faced 
disk with emanating rays that is called a sunburst. But when a simple, abbreviated symbol is required, that symbol is a circle with a 
point in the center.AlchemyThe evolution of both matter and spirit, from its lowest to its 
highest state, is the ultimate task and imperative of alchemy. That 
evolution is sometimes described as a series of stages, like the 
rungs on a ladder that must be ascended step by step. Each stage 
in this progression is a refinement and improvement on what went 
before, and each is given a planetary name and a metal to go with 
it. The planet is the sphere of a Greek god with lessons to teach 
and powers to bestow. The metal associated with the planet is the 
material equivalent of the psychological and spiritual nature of 
the planetary sphere.For alchemy, the sun is the purest, most perfect, and most 
powerful step on the ladder of evolution. Its metal is gold, the 
purest and most refined of metals and the perfection of nature. In alchemy, the symbol for the sun and also for gold is a circle with a 
dot in the middle.
QabalahThe sun appears three times in Qabalah, but never directly.Its first appearance is as the Crown, the number one on the Tree 
of Life. It is the scintillating beginning of all creation and contains 
within its abstract glory all that is to follow. Its color is white.Second, it is Beauty, the number six at the center of the Tree 
of Life. This is the sun whose radiance permeates and defines the 
world of the spirit and is both the source and the goal of spiritual 
enlightenment. Its color is yellow.Third, it is the thirtieth path on the Tree of Life, the Hebrew 
letter Resh, which means beginning and is associated with consciousness in the world of nature. It is the light in the eyes of living 
beings that signifies awareness, and its color is red-orange.Qabalah has little tolerance for pictures or visual imagery, so it 
has no graphic sign for the sun.ScienceScience sees the sun as the center of our immediate universe and 
the source of all energy, and hence of all life, in the solar system of 
which the earth is a part. The sun is a star, and stars are a coalescence of the matter and energy of the entire universe and the big 
bang that gave rise to it all. We are said to be made of star stuff, and 
the sun is our personal star. With it we live. Without it we do not.In astronomy, the science of planets, sun, and stars, the symbol 
for the sun is a circle with a dot in the center.
EgyptA very long time ago, the Egyptians saw the sun rise each morning 
from the underworld and depart the sky for that same underworld 
each evening. The night was seen to surround both the worlds of 
the living and the dead, the worlds above and below. Day was seen 
to be a periodic brightness drawn on the canvas of perpetual night. 
The sun was the child of Hathor, creator of the world and goddess of the night. Each new day was a rebirth; with each new dawn 
the sun was reborn from the womb of Hathor, and the world was 
renewed as well.Without the sun, only the gods and goddesses existed. With 
the birth of the sun, humanity and all mortal beings could exist 
as well.In the hieroglyphics of ancient Egypt, the symbol for the sun 
was a circle with a dot in the middle, the seed of life carried in the 
womb of the goddess. This is the first known appearance of the 
pointed circle as the symbol of the sun.Now let's look at the sun in the cards.
The FoolThe sun in The Fool is the Qabalistic sun of the 
number one, called the Crown. It is the source of 
what is called the Scintillating Intelligence, which 
is associated with the path of The Fool. From its 
sparkle will be made the whole universe that is yet 
to be born.It shows fourteen rays, which refer to the 
numbers one, two, and eleven-numbers one and 
two on the Tree of Life, called the Crown and 
Wisdom, and path number ii, called The Fool, 
which connects them. i + 2 + II = 14.The importance of the sun in The Fool is that 
it is the very beginning of absolutely everything.The HierophantIn The Hierophant, the sun is both a Masonic and 
an astrological symbol. Together with the crescent 
of the moon, it forms the sign for Taurus (3), the 
astrological attribution of The Hierophant. It is 
a reminder that The Hierophant knows and regulates the secrets of both the light and the dark 
halves of everything.
The ChariotThe Chariot has the sun in the crown of the charioteer, whose symbolism is also Masonic, including 
sun, moon, and stars. The issue of this symbolism 
in The Chariot is maintaining internal balance, 
staying steady, centered, and effective between the 
alternating influences of day and night.In both The Hierophant and The Chariot, the 
sun is a reminder of the duality of celestial symbolism and the necessity to honor the powers of both 
day and night in ourselves.The LoversThe sun in The Lovers is pure Qabalah, though it 
also accords well with Freemasonry. Everything 
that was unified in the upper reaches of the Tree 
of Life becomes openly divided into pairs of polar 
opposites on the path of The Lovers. From this 
point onward in the creative process, nothing can 
be seen or understood without reference to its 
opposite. There is no light without darkness, no 
love without hate, no good without evil.All the pairs of opposites are symbolized by the 
man and the woman in the picture. But the unifying angel between them shows the way to bring 
opposites together, and the sun behind the angel is the glory of the middle way from which all opposites emerge and to 
which, in time, they will all return.
This sun has forty-five rays, referring to the numerical value of 
the name of Adam in Hebrew. In Adam, male and female were originally united and will eventually be reunited. The sun reminds you 
that both sides of every issue need each other and that every apparently irreconcilable argument has a resolution.DeathThen comes Death. In Death, it is not immediately clear from the picture whether the sun in rising or setting, whether we are seeing the hopeful 
signs of a dawning day or the unavoidable onset of 
night. Of course, the answer is a bit of both. As the 
sun rises in one place, it sets in another. Whatever 
it is doing now, it will eventually do the opposite.Strictly as a symbol of Death, understood in 
the usual way as an ending, the sun is setting, and 
the time is between sunset and dawn. But Death is 
also a precursor to, and necessary preparation for, 
renewed life. Understood in this way, the sun is rising and the time is dawn. In Qabalah every path, 
including Death, is a two-way street.The symbol of the sun in the Qabalistic view 
of Death, shows Death as a path that must constantly be traveled 
in both directions. This is in accord with the Egyptian view of the 
sun as a deity that travels daily through both the land of the living 
and the land of the dead.The sun in Death is there to remind you that every moment is 
both a beginning and an ending. Which of these you experience at 
any given moment is a matter of perspective.
TemperanceThe sun in Temperance is the sun disk on the 
angel's forehead. It is a reference to the spiritual 
sun of Beauty, the number six on the Tree of Life, 
which is one end of the path of Temperance. It is 
the fiery half of the extremes of hot and cold that 
must be experienced on this path to find the precarious balance of the middle way, which is the 
true lesson of Temperance.The other half, the extreme of cold, can be 
found in the water of the lunar pool of nature 
beneath the angel's feet, which is the other end 
of the path of Temperance.Here again, Qabalah and Freemasonry join 
to express the necessary duality of sun and moon, 
hot and cold, light and dark. The lesson of the 
sun here is once again that it is only half of all there is. The other 
half is night and darkness, and it is just as necessary. This lesson is 
repeated over and over in tarot, but it is a hard lesson to learn when 
life is troubling.
The SunFinally, the sun makes an appearance as itself in 
The Sun card. Here it is unequivocally bright and 
fortunate, without a trace of darkness anywhere. 
It is the mythological deity of a hundred pantheons, the brilliant ball of fire in the sky drawn by 
the horses of the gods.There is one possible source of trouble to be 
found here if you wish to find it. It is located in 
the card's esoteric function, which is the double 
one of Fertility and Barrenness. The unblinking, 
unshielded sun can burn, blind, and wither what 
remains too long unprotected from its intensity.This sun has twenty-two rays, although 
one is hidden at the top of the card behind the 
number. There are eleven straight and eleven 
wavy rays representing the twenty-two paths of the Tree of Life 
and the twenty-two Major Arcana connected with them. The 
alternating wavy and straight rays signify the alternation of male 
and female energies, even in the straightforward brilliance of the 
sun's unshaded light.The sun's final lesson in its last appearance in tarot is the pure, 
unadulterated power that we spoke of at the beginning of this class. 
It never fades or fails. It plays no favorites. It sees everything, judges 
nothing, and is equally available to all that exists beneath it.The power to live, to be, and to act is in infinite supply and is 
universally available. The power of The Sun does not die with death 
or fade with night. It is always steady, strong, and certain. It blazes 
inside of you as well as outside of you, and nothing in the world can 
extinguish it.
Sun 
Meditation
Close your eyes now; breathe and relax. Reflect on the final lesson 
of the sun. See if you can find the sun blazing within you. If you can, 
dwell in that experience for a moment. Remember it so you can take 
it with you.Take two deep breaths and, when you're ready, open your eyes. 
=== FILE_034 ===
BANNERSHello, and welcome to our class on banners, which appear in three 
cards-Death, The Sun, and Judgement. Banners appear in several 
Minor Arcana cards as well, but the implications of these banners 
will be covered in the general discussion.Imagery in tarot is of three kinds: natural phenomena that have 
been invested with symbolic significance, objects made by human 
hands for ordinary purposes but that come to have symbolic meaning, and objects conceived and made for no other purpose than to 
act as symbols.Banners are symbols of the third kind. They are very old, probably older than writing or anything resembling civilization.The essential banner is made of two parts, very like a cross. 
One part is the vertical, the other the horizontal. The vertical is a 
rigid pole, whose purpose is to support the horizontal and to raise 
it above eye level. The pole can be held in the hand, stuck in the 
ground, or affixed to a high place like a roof or tower. The horizontal is a flexible medium attached to the pole that bears a symbol and 
unfurls and flies on the wind where everyone can see it.The purpose of a banner is to make a symbolic statement 
that can't be missed or ignored. The rigidity and height of the 
pole give it stature, and the energy of the wind gives it numinous intensity and power. When we speak of a banner, the vertical is 
implied and generic, but the horizontal is specific and carries all 
the meaning.
Once upon a time, before humanity could write, banners were 
made of animal tails or pelts. Their message was simple. The person 
or group for whom the banner was carried had the qualities of the 
animal whose skin was attached to the pole.Eventually, banners were made of leather or cloth and painted 
with symbols, but their message was the same. They proclaimed the 
identity, the qualities, and the importance of a person or a group.In this way, a banner is like a totem. It is so imbued with the significance and importance of a particular identity that it has a power 
of its own. The presence of a banner on a battlefield, on parade, or 
on display is the symbol of a living, vital presence. To capture, desecrate, or destroy a banner is to insult and even to injure the reality 
it represents.When your banner is flying high above the ground, all is well. 
When it falls, woe betide you.It would be fair to say that every human community with a 
public presence and a sense of its own importance has a banner or 
a flag, which is a form of banner. Countries and political organizations; religions and spiritual organizations; civic, social, sports, 
and military groups; even esoteric and magickal orders-all have 
their banners, and for all, the banners serve the same purpose. 
They catch the eye, collect and focus the energy, dominate the 
attention, and unify and imbue with identity a crowd or a group 
of individuals.Banners make an impact-they catch the eye and hold it, in 
tarot as much as anywhere else. But in tarot, as elsewhere, the symbolism and identity displayed on a banner is often enigmatic. You 
won't grasp it or be compelled by it unless you have been taught 
beforehand what it means.
Banners appear in tarot directly and indirectly, and their meanings come from two sources: Freemasonry and the Order of the 
Golden Dawn.Freemasonry makes liberal use of banners. There are separate 
ones for the York and Scottish Rites and the Royal Arch Degree, 
for each of the major officers in a lodge and for each Grand Lodge, 
as well as for specific rituals and for Freemasonry as a whole. For 
the Golden Dawn, banners play a similar role and even share some 
of the symbolic imagery.The impact of Masonry on banners in tarot may very well come 
as something of a surprise. Masonic symbolism is largely drawn 
from biblical sources, especially with regard to King Solomon, 
around whose temple much of Masonic legend, belief, and practice 
revolve. The key to the indirect presence of Masonic banner symbolism in tarot can be found in the general standard (or banner) of 
Freemasonry. Here is a description of its symbolic content.On the tracing board of the Royal Arch Degree are the banners 
of the twelve tribes of Israel. These are:Judah-scarlet, a lion couchantIssachar-blue, a donkey crouching beneath its burdenZebulon purple, a shipReuben-red, a manSimeon yellow, a swordGad-white, a troop of horsemenEphraim green, an oxManasseh-flesh colored, a vine by the side of a wallBenjamin-green, a wolfDan-green, an eagleAsher-purple, a cupNaphtali-blue, a deer
Four of these banners make the primary symbolism of the general 
standard of Freemasonry, the banner of the order, which can be 
carried in all processions of the Craft to distinguish them from any 
other association or group.On a shield, divided by a green and yellow cross into four 
quarters, the following devices can be found:In the first quarter is a golden lion on a blue shield to represent 
the banner of the tribe of Judah.In the second quarter is a black ox on a field of gold, which 
represents the banner of the tribe of Ephraim.In the third quarter is a man on a field of gold, which represents 
the banner of the tribe of Reuben.In the fourth quarter is a golden eagle on a blue ground, which 
represents the banner of the tribe of Dan.Over the entire shield is the Ark of the Covenant as a crest and 
underneath is the motto "Holiness to the Lord."Each of the four symbols in the shield is said to be the banner 
of one of the four principal tribes of Israel. When the twelve tribes 
marched through the wilderness of Sinai, they encamped around 
these four principal banners. On the east were three tribes under 
the standard of Judah, on the west were three tribes under the standard of Ephraim, on the south were three tribes under the standard 
of Reuben, and on the north were three tribes under the standard 
of Dan. The banner of Judah was a lion, that of Ephraim an ox, that 
of Reuben a man, and that of Dan an eagle.The banner of Freemasonry is thus made up of and derived 
from the banners of the four leading tribes of Israel. The simple 
significance of each symbol is as follows:
The man signifies reason.The lion is power.The ox is patience.The eagle is wisdom.The Masonic standard is intended to indicate the origin of the 
Craft from Solomon, the last king of Israel, under whom the twelve 
tribes were united.And these four symbols of the Masonic banner appear where 
in tarot? I'm sure you know where to find them, but did you know 
what you were looking at?Now let's look at the three cards in which specific banners 
appear and talk about their meanings.DeathFirst is the black and white banner carried by 
the skeletal horseman in Death. This is the 
blaze of the sun in underworld of the dead, pictured as an unfolded white rose on a ground of 
darkness. The perfection symbolized by the sun 
as a sunburst in the land of the living takes the 
form of a five-petaled rose in the land of the 
dead. Its visible pistils and stamens are a promise of rebirth, a pledge that death is not the end 
but a beginning.
The SunThe banner of The Sun card is the red-orange color 
of the Qabalistic sun in the world of nature, and it 
is also the color of the thirtieth path on the Tree of 
Life, which is associated with The Sun. Its shape is 
a double symbol: first, as the shape of the Egyptian 
hieroglyph that means Ra, the one god, the god of 
the sun; second, as the shape of the Hebrew letter Resh, which means beginning or source and is 
attributed to the thirtieth path on the Tree of Life 
and The Sun card in tarot. In both cases, the banner 
shape is suggestive rather than exact.JudgementThe red cross on a white field of the banner in the 
Judgement card also has two references. The first 
is to the banner of the Knights Templar, which was 
a red cross on a white field. The sworn and primary duty of the Templars was to protect pilgrims 
as they crossed the borders between the countries 
and kingdoms of Europe and Asia Minor that lay 
on the path to the Holy Land. Here, in the card, 
the boundary is between the dreaming and waking 
state of the spirit as it rises to heed the call of 
Gabriel's trumpet.The second reference is to Mars, whose first 
duty, similar to that of the Templars, was to guard 
the innermost and holiest sanctum of a Greek 
temple, called the adytum.
The visual reference to Mars in the banner is by way of the 
magic square of Mars, which is five by five. The cross divides the 
banner into four white corners. The proportion of the corners to 
the stripe of the cross is two to one. Each corner is said to be made 
of four small squares; each arm of the cross is said to be made of 
two small squares of the same size, and the center of the cross is 
made of one similar square. Four corners of four squares each equals 
sixteen squares. Four arms made of two squares each, plus one center square equals nine squares. All together, the banner is made of 
twenty-five squares-five by five, the magic square of Mars.The banner of Death focuses your attention on the promise of 
rebirth and the beginning that follows each ending.The banner of The Sun reminds you that the sun is the beginning and the source of power of everything in the natural world.The banner of Judgement is the pledge of protection for every 
spirit that begins the journey to enlightenment.Banner ExerciseIt is the nature of a banner to focus, inspire, empower, and lead and 
to do this with a single simple gesture-unfurling a symbol for all to 
see. The experiential exercise for this class is equally simple-just 
create a symbol that expresses your identity, focuses your attention, 
and inspires you to action. This is your personal symbol for your 
own banner.You might not immediately create something definitive, but 
continue working on it until you have succeeded to your own satisfaction. I promise you that your effort will be well rewarded.
Draw your banner here.
 
=== FILE_035 ===
INTEGRATION: 
HORSES, SUNS, AND BANNERSHello, and welcome to our integration class for horses, suns, and 
banners. These symbols can be found in thirteen cards:The four KnightsThe 6 of WandsThe FoolThe HierophantThe LoversThe ChariotDeathTemperanceThe SunJudgementIt is the purpose of an integration class to remind you of the most 
important issues of the symbols we covered in the previous three 
classes and how those issues are embodied in specific cards. The 
reminder is useful because not many people can remember, much 
less use, the masses of information and experience we cover just by 
reading about them.What we're going to do now is to reduce that mass to a few 
important points you can retrieve from memory whenever you 
need or want them. After we've done that, we'll practice a bit to see 
how well we've succeeded.First, let's recap the vital issues of horses, suns, and banners. 
Then we'll go back and take a practical look at what we need to 
remember in the cards when these symbols appear.
HorsesHorses in tarot are always carrying a rider, and the two are a unit. 
Sometimes the rider tells the horse where to go, and sometimes 
the rider surrenders to his horse's knowledge and instincts. In the 
world of death and in psychological and spiritual landscapes, the 
horse knows what to do and guides the rider to his destination.In the world of ordinary events, including all worldly considerations, the rider knows where to go and how to get there. In these 
cases the horse goes where he's told.In either event, the appearance of a horse and rider tells you 
that an important drama or chapter in the life of a querent is in the 
process of working itself out.Another important thing to remember in the relationship 
between horse and rider is that the rider gets his virtues from his 
horse. Purity, nobility, energy, heroism, radiance, certainty, sacredness-all are expressed first through the nature of the horse.SunsThe main lesson of the sun wherever it is found is life, potential, 
and power. The sun is the power inside all the forms of nature-the 
power to be and the power to act. The sun exists both outside of 
everything, in the world, and inside of everything, in consciousness. 
It is the source of physical and psychological existence, and it is 
the power in everything of enthusiasm, optimism, and the will to 
continue. The sun acts in this way on and in everything from a rock 
to a human being.The sun is also a symbol of half of all there is, the ruler of the day 
and all that can be associated with the day. Its appearance reminds 
us of the night and its darkness that is the other half of the world, 
which must surely follow the day in its proper time.
Sun and moon, day and night, light and dark, projecting and 
yielding, constantly turn around each other and become each other 
in an endless circle. This is what is described by the Chinese yinyang symbol, and it is the first lesson of the lemniscate, the symbol 
for eternity that is the western cousin of yin and yang.BannersThe primary purpose of banners is to project identity. A banner 
describes who and what someone is in a way that everyone can see 
and no one can miss or ignore. Banners focus awareness, rally scattered energy, demand attention, inspire, empower, and lead.A banner proclaims, "Here I am!" It says, "Join me! Follow me! 
Protect me! Honor me!"To raise a banner is to do and say all of these things.These are the most general meanings and issues of horses, suns, and 
banners in tarot. But their particular applications lie in the cards 
where they appear. The best way to review this information and 
make it stick is through practical application. So we're going to do 
that with a reading using just these cards. 
=== FILE_036 ===
SYMBOL SPREAD: 
THE RIDER'S JOURNEYThis spread is based upon the symbols studied in our classes on 
horses, suns, and banners. It is a very unusual spread as it makes use 
of only one card, which is looked at from the perspective of three different positions. This is another subtle but powerful reading that 
benefits from contemplation.
The Rider's journey is primarily a personal spread, best used as 
a reading you do for yourself Its purpose is to suggest a new way to 
deal with an area of difficulty in your life that could benefit from a 
fresh approach.It is possible to use this spread with a querent by acting as a 
facilitator rather than a traditional reader. This is not to say that 
you can't get information from the spread to tell a querent, but the 
insights will be much deeper if they come from the querent's own 
experience and perceptions.The pictorial symbolic concept of this spread is a horse and 
rider (seen as a unit); the rider carries a banner and waves it in a 
sunlit sky.The ProcessAnother thing that makes this spread different from others is the 
way the card is drawn. You have two choices:
i. Look through the deck until a card catches your attention 
and holds it.2. Without looking at your deck, use the first card that comes 
to mind.Either way is fine. You want the draw to be a conscious choice as 
opposed to picking it at random. It doesn't matter why the card 
catches your attention or comes to mind-you don't have to know 
that in advance.Once you have chosen your card, place the physical card on the 
table face up in front of you in position #i. After you have contemplated/interpreted it from the perspective of the Horse and Rider, 
move it into position #2 and interpret the same card as a banner. 
Even though the card hasn't changed, the nature of its message will. 
Lastly, move the card into position #3 and reinterpret it from the 
perspective of the sun.The Horse and RiderYour card in the position of the Horse and Rider describes the 
energetic landscape through which you are traveling and the 
resources you have to work with. The horse and rider is a symbol of 
a drama that is going on in your life at this time. It's a developing 
storyline-what's happening now and in the immediate future.The horse offers you a way to go-perhaps other than the 
way you're going now. If your card were a real horse, what kind 
of horse would it be? At what pace does it prefer to travel? As the 
rider, do you wish to be in control, or are you content to go where 
your horse leads you?The card is a resource. It allows you to change the energy you're 
working with now to an energy you would prefer to work with. If you're in an intractable situation and you need another approach, 
the insights offered by this card will give it to you. Then it's a matter 
of choosing whether to use this insight or not.
The BannerWhen the card becomes your banner, it becomes a symbol of your 
ideal identity you can officially proclaim yourself to be this thing 
right now if you wish to.The banner is a symbolic organizing principle. You can use the 
idea expressed on your banner to rally your energies, focus your efforts, 
inspire you, and eventually lead yourself to a space you want to be in.By raising your banner, you give yourself permission to embody 
whatever it signifies.The SunIn the position of the Sun, your card describes the appropriate 
energy to help you along your journey. It gives you the strength and 
power you need to move forward and keep going.Here, your card shows you away you can be completely responsive to the moment. It describes what can give you pleasure and joy 
in the doing.The spread doesn't require that you go in a certain direction or even 
predict that you will. What it does is give you the option. Because the 
spread uses only one card, you can display the card or bring it to mind 
any time you would like to invoke or recall the energy of the spread.Any time you feel stuck, may the Rider's Journey help you along 
your way!
 
=== FILE_037 ===
ARMOR, BLINDFOLDS, 
FEATHERS
 
=== FILE_038 ===
ARMORHello, and welcome to our class on the symbolism of armor in tarot. 
Armor appears in eight cards-The Emperor, The Chariot, Death, 
the four Knights, and the King of Pentacles. As usual with the 
imagery we discuss, there is a general symbolic meaning and a good 
deal of history to the image of armor and also specific applications 
in individual cards.It seems as though any part of the imagery of tarot we talk 
about has a very long history and is fraught with meaning. In the 
past, we've looked at crowns and pillars and paths and crosses 
and suns, moons and stars. We've talked about roses and lilies and 
mountains and horses and banners and pools. Each one of these by 
itself is a symbolic gem. Together, they make a treasure so rich that 
it's hard to take it all in.
The symbol of armor will be another piece of treasure. For our 
purposes, there are three things to know about armor:i. Where there's armor, there are weapons and war.2. Armor can be both practical and ornamental.3. Armor has been around as long as war and is still here today. 
From the looks of both current research and science fiction, it 
will be around for an indefinite tomorrowArmor was the fighting man's answer to how badly he could get 
hurt by lethal weapons. To survive a serious battle, he needed some 
serious protection. To survive several battles, that protection had 
to be very serious indeed. For both warrior and soldier, good armor 
was (and still is) the difference between minor and crippling injury, 
between life and death.Armor more than weapons is the seal of the soldier or warrior. 
Any traveler, hunter, or crook can carry and use weapons, but armor 
is a long-term investment for someone whose job it is to periodically fight to the death on a field of battle.Armor has always been expensive. Even a piece or two was once 
more than a poor man could afford. A good helmet or shield, the 
most basic forms of armor, required high craft and expensive materials to make. Plate armor and coats of mail were works of art, and 
a full set of armor, consisting of dozens to hundreds of parts tailormade for each user, was a major piece of engineering. And that was 
just for the man. If he also had a horse to protect, it could get really 
expensive.But that was just the beginning. If a fighting man was successful, 
in the long run he became a hero or an aristocrat or both. He had to 
show off every so often in full military rig. That meant ceremonial armor, with special finishes, etched designs, and precious metals. It 
was a sign of wealth, status, and power.
This was true everywhere from China to South America, from 
Arabia to Japan, from the Asian steppes to the capitals of Europe. 
And it has been true in all times but the present, when ornamental 
armor has disappeared and functional armor belongs to government. But in all times and places, armor was the symbol of the 
fighting man who put himself in harm's way over and over again.Whatever you may think of war and violence in general, it 
seems to exist everywhere and always, suggesting that organized 
mayhem is an archetypal aspect of humanity. Amid the brutality, 
cruelty, ugliness, and other nasty qualities and consequences of war, 
armored warriors and soldiers have developed a number of major 
virtues and magnificent skills and even a spirituality all their own.Armor, more than weaponry, is a symbol of what is excellent 
and noble about a warrior or soldier. This is as true of the modern 
marine or policeman in his bulletproof vest as it was of the Roman 
legionary, Japanese samurai, or European knight of the past in his 
chain mail or breastplate.Armor was and is the second skin of the warrior, which he puts 
on to face a life-and-death struggle. It is the symbol of his public 
acceptance of this ultimate struggle.Which brings us to one final modern version of armor, a symbol from the realm of psychology instead of war. In this version, 
armor is the name given to a personal and private, unconscious, 
self-protective reflex that guards against mostly imaginary dangers. 
It's something like wearing a bulletproof vest day and night for fear 
of muggers. This armor is constructed and worn unconsciously and 
internally, out of fear and a sense of perpetual vulnerability.Either way, armor is a form of defense. In its original physical 
form it is a symbol of consciousness and courage. In its psychological form it is the name of an internal unconscious dysfunction.
When you see an armored figure in tarot, you would be right in 
asking whether it is a sign of strength or weakness. Which brings us 
to the cards themselves.The Four KnightsThe four knights can be grouped together up to a point. They are 
all armored because the clearest symbol of a knight, what distinguishes him above all other symbols, is his armor. It is a symbol of 
public duty, of rank, of the specific virtues and skills of his calling, 
of his spirituality, and of his bond with others of his kind.The armor of all four knights is practical rather than ceremonial, intended to protect rather than display. Every knight wears 
a full set of plate armor, the latest and most evolved form to arise 
in Europe. In each case, the knight wears a helmet and a breast plate, as well as shoulder, arm, leg, and foot protection. Each has a spur on his foot, a plume on 
his helmet, and an ornamented surcoat covering 
his torso. None have a shield, but the surcoat 
serves to identify each of them, which is one of 
the functions of a shield.
The Knight of Wands and the Knight of 
Pentacles have gloves on both hands. The Knight 
of Swords has one gloved hand and one bare 
hand, and the hands of the Knight of Cups are 
both bare. Gloves, or gauntlets, are protection 
for the hands, but they are relatively clumsy. Bare 
hands are more vulnerable, but they are also more 
agile and sensitive. The bare hand of the Knight 
of Swords holds his sword, an indication of skill 
and speed with his weapon. The bare hands of 
the Knight of Cups are needed by a lover and a 
warrior of the heart.The visor on the helmet of the Knight of 
Swords is raised above his head. His face is 
clearest, most visible, and least protected of all 
the knights despite his headlong charge into 
battle. This is one sign that he is a pure knight, 
air of air, transparent and abstract.The helmet of the Knight of Wands is the 
most complete and defended of all the knights. 
He is also a pure knight, fire of fire. He is a fiery 
vessel containing a fiery force in a fiery world, and 
his helmet protects him from his own nature.
The King of PentaclesThe armored foot of the King of Pentacles is a 
hint of the full armor hidden from sight by his 
robes. It is a symbol of the public servant who 
guards the well-being of his kingdom despite his 
apparent personal opulence.The EmperorThe astrological attribution of The Emperor is 
Aries, and his armor, of which all you can see are 
the feet, is a reference to the warrior god and a 
reminder that The Emperor is also a warrior.
The ChariotHere, the armor is a reference to the shell of 
Cancer, the astrological attribution of The 
Chariot. The Chariot card as a whole refers 
to the deeper symbolism of the Merkaba, the 
chariot in Ezekiel's prophetic vision that carries 
the knowable form of God. For this reason the 
armor is ceremonial rather than practical.The breastplate is in the shape of Pisces; the 
black, pleated skirt refers to the deep waters of 
Scorpio; and the moon-shaped shoulder guards 
are a reference to The High Priestess, source of 
all the waters.The bright square at the center of the breast 
plate is a symbol of the four Qabalistic worlds 
into which The Chariot brings all good things 
from above to below and from which it brings reciprocal blessings 
from below to above. This is a reference to the esoteric title of the 
card, The House of Influence.
DeathThe armor of Death, though full, is purely ceremonial, since he clearly needs no protection. 
It is the symbol of one whose only reason for 
being is to serve, since it covers a reality of bare 
bone, unfleshed existence with no personal 
agenda. Death is the ultimate public servant 
and in this image armor is the symbol of perfect service.From another perspective, however, his black 
armor is also a symbol of the self-protective hard 
shell of a scorpion, a reference to the card's 
astrological attribution of Scorpio.
Contemplation 
of the Symbol 
ofArmor
The time has come to try a little exercise. It is a contemplation.Close your eyes, breathe, and relax.Surround yourself with darkness and rest.Let your thoughts, desires, feelings, and sensations melt away into that 
darkness.Become empty but completely aware.Now look within. Rediscover the shape of yourself with all of its facets 
and complexity, shining like a gem in the night.Re-enter the completeness of yourself as a witness.Ask yourself this question:Do I wear armor in any way, either as a heroic public servant or as a 
defended individual?Take the time to let an answer emerge from the darkness.Now, once again, let your personal shape dissolve in the darkness that 
surrounds you and rest.The time has come to return.Take two deep breaths and, when you're 
ready, open your eyes but stay in a meditative state.Take a few minutes to write down your answer to your contemplation.
 
=== FILE_039 ===
BLINDFOLDSHello, and welcome to our class on blindfolds in tarot. Blindfolds 
appear in just two cards-the 2 of Swords and the 8 of Swords. But 
each embodies a principle of great importance and considerable 
subtlety, so we'll have a lot to talk about.A blindfold creates temporary blindness and symbolizes 
blindness and darkness in general. It may serve one of two main 
purposes:i. to prevent normal functioning in a world that requires sight;2. to prevent distraction by the sights of the ordinary world.In tarot the two cards with a blindfolded figure each reflect one of 
these two purposes.In the world at large-in literature, mythology, and realityblindfolds have the same implications.• Justice and Fortune are goddesses who are blindfolded to avoid 
favoritism by avoiding visible distinctions.• Hostages are blindfolded to cause disorientation and ignorance of their captors and surroundings.• Children blindfold each other to play games like Pin the Tail 
on the Donkey, forcing them to use senses other than sight 
to make something normally simple into something difficult, 
unpredictable, and funny.• In the game of Blind Man's Bluff, adults do the same thing to 
produce humorous erotic moments with strangers, free of the 
improprieties and embarrassments of foreknowledge.
• Those about to be executed are blindfolded to spare them the 
frightening knowledge of the moment of their death.• Those for whom the presence of light makes it difficult to 
sleep blindfold themselves to produce a comforting darkness.A blindfold can produce concentration and disorientation, knowledge and ignorance, fear and the absence of fear, freedom and constraint, darkness and light. Perhaps it can be said that a blindfold 
enhances a sought after or already existing physical, mental, emotional, or spiritual state.A blindfold creates an immediate functional blindness, and in 
doing so it can produce either an inner light or an inner darkness. 
A blindfold can be more subtle than a cloth tied physically over the 
eyes. It can be a word or an idea, a feeling or a predilection, a deed 
or a memory, a talent or a samskara.In the case of a nonphysical blindfold, its effect is to focus or 
filter, to redirect immediate contact with the world as it is happening through a pre-existing perspective, to darken or lighten 
reality, to add qualities to it or remove qualities from it, to give 
meaning to plain facts, or to make reality into a symbol and to 
transform it.This transformation can be experienced as taking place inwardly 
or externally; it can be felt as positive or negative. It can be a transformation to be sought after or undone. The blindfold in the 2 of 
Swords is the first kind-taking place inwardly, felt as positive, and 
sought after. In the 8 of Swords it is the second kind-taking place 
externally, felt as negative, as being undone. But we'll talk more 
about that later.
Blindfold 
Exercise
For a moment, close your eyes and cover them with your hand. Imagine 
that you have just been blindfolded by a force outside yourself.You can't 
just remove your hand and open your eyes. The blindfold remains in 
place until whoever placed it there removes it. The darkness, though 
temporary, is not of your choosing. It is enforced. Be completely aware 
that the hand that blindfolds you, although it is your own, cannot be 
removed until the exercise is over.Sit for a few moments with this awareness. Do not remove your hand 
from your eyes for several minutes.Then keep your hand over your eyes 
just a little while longer. Finally, when you are ready, take a deep breath 
and open your eyes.Take a deep breath and, when you are ready, remove the blindfold and 
see.Take a minute to write down the thoughts and feelings you had while 
you were blindfolded.
CHARACTERIZATION QUESTIONNAIRE
Here's a little questionnaire we'd like you to take. Write down each 
pair of words in the following list. Decide whether you associate 
that word with darkness or light. Then, next to the word, write D 
for darkness or L for light. There are a total of twenty-six words 
that make eighteen pairs.We chose these words to play with because they are significant to 
us. You can make your own list and work with it in the same way.We characterized all the words in the list as either light or dark. 
This characterization makes each word richer and more personal.
But light can be experienced as positive or negative, inward or 
outward, obvious or mysterious, solid or insubstantial, or any of 
the other pairs, according to context and the temperament of the 
beholder. The same can be said of darkness. And what is described 
one way today can be turned around tomorrow.Let's go back to our word list and take the time to make it even 
richer. Look at each word again and decide whether the light or 
darkness you associated with it earlier is inward or outward light 
or darkness. If it is inward, write an I after it. If it is outward, write 
an O.Then decide whether that word has a positive or a negative feel 
to it, and write a plus or minus sign next to the previous letter. For 
example, for Wald, the word "suffering" is dark, outward, and negative. But the word "masculine" is dark, inward, and positive.As you can see, each of the words in the list before you has 
begun to take on the richness of your own inner experience. In this 
way, you can increase the richness of a word many times over. In 
this way, a word becomes a blindfold. Do you see it?In the same way, memories, feelings, and all the other things we 
have mentioned also become blindfolds. A blindfold transforms the 
general into the personal, the objective into the subjective.The time has come to take a look at the cards themselves. Each 
of the two has a bias and intent in one direction rather than the 
other.
2 of SwordsThe 2 of Swords looks inward into mind and 
spirit, toward the mysterious, invisible, and 
insubstantial. The blindfold serves to prevent 
distraction. The esoteric title of the 2 of Swords 
is The Lord of Peace Restored, and the 2 of any 
suit is the wisdom of that suit. In this case the 
blindfold is not temporary It is the permanent 
symbol of peace and wisdom.8 of SwordsIntuitively, the figure in the 8 of Swords appears 
to be experiencing the darkness of ignorance, the 
constraints of the outward and obvious, the limits of the physical and immediate. But the blindfold on the figure in the 8 of Swords is a symbol 
of optimism, of the darkness that precedes the 
light of initiation. The person in this card submits 
to being bound and hoodwinked and led to the 
threshold of a higher and better state.The esoteric title of the 8 of Swords is The 
Lord of Shortened Force, and the 8 of any suit is 
the genius of that suit. In this case, the blindfolding is a temporary but repeated condition, since 
the process of initiation is understood to be continuous. The light of understanding on one level is the darkness that precedes initiation onto a higher level. For 
anyone traveling the path of personal transformation, the blindfold 
is a steady, and steadily changing, part of life.
In the practice of divination, you will do your best work if you 
have an idea of your querent's inner state. Where is your querent, 
including yourself when you are reading for yourself, on the circular 
journey of birth and rebirth, of emergence and return?If you know that, you will know whether the blindfold is a symbol of an ordinary or a special darkness, whether it is a symbol of 
confusion and constraint or a tool of liberation, whether the querent 
is on a path or just bumbling around.The image of the blindfold then becomes a test of your own 
ability to see. 
=== FILE_040 ===
FEATHERSHello, and welcome to our class on the symbol of feathers in tarot. 
Normally, we would tell you at the beginning of the class how many 
cards in the deck contain feathers and which ones they are. But in 
this case it's not so easy to do. There are a number of cards where 
you can't quite tell if you're looking at feathers or not. And there are 
several cards that contain images that are not officially feathers but 
look remarkably like them.So the first thing we'd like you to do is look through your deck 
very carefully and separate out the cards that you think contain 
feathers. Then we'll make a list and arrive at a consensus of which 
cards we will use in this class.
Here's the list that we've compiled and that we'll work with:Three KnightsKnight of WandsKnight of SwordsKnight of CupsThree AngelsRaphael in The LoversMichael in TemperanceGabriel in JudgementOthersThe FoolThe ChariotThe Wheel of FortuneDeathThe SunPage of WandsThat is twelve cards in all that officially and obviously contain the 
image of the feather. We'll discuss these cards in groups or categories as well as individually. That will yield a lot of information and 
give you plenty to think about and work with.Let's talk a little about feathers in general.First, of course, feathers have practical uses. As fans, they have 
kept us cool. As down-in coats and vests, comforters and pillows-they have kept us warm. On arrows, to which they lend the 
essential quality of true and steady flight, they have been crucial 
to hunting and war. As quill pens, they have helped preserve in ink 
a thousand years of the knowledge and history of Western civilization. And as ornaments, they are perhaps the earliest and most 
enduring of all human adornments.
The things to remember here are coolness, warmth, softness, 
lightness, hollowness, flight, and beauty.The second major function of feathers is in or as ritual objects. 
In ritual, a feather is the bearer of the magickal qualities of birds 
in general and of the particular bird it came from. The magickal 
lore and symbolism of birds is a subject all by itself and needs its 
own lesson, so all we can do here is mention it. Suffice it to say that 
the feathers of such birds as the eagle, the crow, the peacock, the 
parrot, and the pheasant evoke in almost everyone an instinctive 
sense of power and mystery.Birds, and therefore feathers, are the prime symbols of flight, 
which gives access to the higher realms, from the upper world of 
the shaman to the heaven of Western religions.In tribal ritual the world over, feathers are given as special gifts 
of friendship, worn as crowns and symbols of distinction, used to 
direct the sacred smoke of smudge and incense, and used to conduct 
the symphony of spirits that are said to hover over and empower 
acts of magick.The third function of feathers is to enhance the magickal 
power of birds and transfer it to mythical and mystical beings. 
The feathered serpent Quetzalcoatl, supreme deity of the Aztecs; 
Pegasus, the mythical flying horse of Greek mythology; the feather 
of the Egyptian goddess Maat against the weight of which the 
innocence or guilt of human souls were weighed; the feathered 
wings of angels who rise and descend between heaven and earthall these borrow the feather from tribal ritual to serve as a symbol 
of civilized divinity.The thing to remember here is the connection of the feather 
to divinity, to beings of higher realms that can only be reached by 
flight.Finally, we get to tarot. All the things we've spoken of so far can 
be useful to divination since they may arise in a reading in a purely 
intuitive context, although they are not specifically tarot related. You'll get a chance to practice this later on, so remember what 
you've heard so far.
In tarot, feathers relate mainly to two things-to the elements 
of fire and air.They relate to air because air is the only medium of flight. They 
relate to fire, because the highest reaches of air touch the lower 
border of the world of fire, the element closest to divinity or to the 
highest parts of yourself It is on feathered wings that the human 
spirit rises to the divine fire.Now let's look at the cards themselves.Judgement,Temperance, and The LoversIn all three cards, an archangel spreads his wings close to the source 
of a fire, giving them a fiery color. They are redder at the top and 
more purple or violet lower down, showing the 
intensity of the heat cooling as the feathers get 
further from the fire.JUDGEMENTThe wings of the angel in judgement are a 
Qabalistic reference. The path of judgement on 
the Tree of Life is the path of elemental fire. It 
is the path of the awakening spirit as it begins its 
journey of self-knowledge. As that spirit rises, the 
fire on the path gets hotter and hotter, and the 
wings of the Archangel Gabriel get redder. The 
upward journey of the spirit gets more and more 
intense as it continues.
TEMPERANCEHere too the reference is Qabalistic. Temperance 
is the direct path to the sun ofTiphereth (Beauty) 
at the center of the Tree of Life. The Archangel 
Michael spreads his wings around the corona of 
the sun, symbolized by the rays around the sun 
disk in the center of his forehead. The wings act 
as a protection from the light and heat of the sun 
and allow these energies to safely penetrate and 
transform any person who has come this far.THE LOVERSIn The Lovers, the wings of the Archangel 
Raphael protect the human form from the intolerable blaze of divine energy. They allow a person 
to stand naked before the eye of God. The path 
of The Lovers on the Tree of Life is even higher 
than the spirituality of Tiphereth. It is one of five 
paths by which you can reach what is perfect in 
yourself.In all of these cards, the feathers of the angels' 
wings are symbols of transcendence, as well as a 
form of protection that makes it possible to survive the heat of the journey of return.
The Chariot,Wheel of Fortune, and the Knight of CupsIn these three cards, the feathered wings are symbols of air, purity, 
and elevation. They let the spirit and the heart soar.THE CHARIOTThe winged solar disc of The Chariot is a symbol of the Egyptian 
sun god rising on the hawk wings of Horus at the beginning of each 
new day. It is the sign of a lofty intellect and the soul's ability to 
hover over the Abyss, across which the path of The Chariot passes 
from above to below and back.THE WHEEL OF FORTUNEThe feathers, in conjunction with the books of the creatures at the 
corners of the card, are symbols of Christian spirituality in the form 
of a reference to the four gospels.
KNIGHT OF CUPSCourt-card ranks are attributed to the elements, 
but each rank has a double attribution. Knights 
are associated with both fire and air-fire on the 
journey of emergence and air on the journey of 
return. In the Knight of Cups, the feathered wings 
associate this knight with the element of air.Also, because the Knight of Cups is often 
interpreted as a lover, the wings at head and heel 
are references to Mercury, whose libido was notorious, and to his winged child, Cupid.Knight ofWands and Knight of SwordsIn these two cards, the red feathers are plumes of 
fire, and they remind us that the rank of knight is 
associated with the element of fire on the journey 
of emergence.KNIGHT OF WANDSThe Knight of Wands, as pictured in the card, is 
a fiery knight in the suit of fire, which makes his 
elemental counterchange fire of fire. This is borne 
out by all of the other exclusively fire symbols in 
the card such as the salamanders and the desert 
landscape.
KNIGHT OF SWORDSThe image of the Knight of Swords is a combination of his fiery rank and the elemental air of the 
suit of swords. In the Rider-Waite-Smith deck, his 
elemental counterchange is fire of air. The former 
is indicated by the fiery plume on his helmet, the 
fiery shape of the cloak flying from his back, and 
the fiery shape of the horse's mane. The symbols 
of air in the card are the birds in the sky and the 
wind-blown trees and clouds.Page of WandsThe rank of page, like all the court-card ranks, 
has a double elemental attribution. The page on 
the journey of emergence is associated with water 
and on the journey of return with earth. The fiery 
feather rising from the metal cap of the Page of 
Wands is a reference to her elemental counterchange, earth of fire.The thing to remember about the feathers in 
these court cards is the intensity of their elemental symbolism.
The Fool,The Sun, and DeathIn The Fool and The Sun, the red feathers are 
plumes of fire, connecting the crown of the head 
with the sun above and acting as a conduit for 
divine fire moving from above to below. In Death, 
the fiery plume is wilted, separated from the sun 
that lights the land of the living. Instead, the sun's 
fire is transmitted downward with reduced intensity, into the land of the dead. Pale and weak as 
it is, the sun finds its way back through Death's 
domain and rises again each day, completely 
reborn in all its original glory.
Intuitive 
Reading 
Exercise
We'd like to give you a chance to put some of this information to use by 
doing a technique called the Voice in the Card.First, take the twelve cards we've been discussing and shuffle them face 
down.Next, draw four cards from this group and place them in front of you 
face up.Now, look at just the feathers in each card. Let your gaze move from 
one card to the next, until the feathers of one card in particular hold 
your attention.Turn the other three cards face down and focus on this 
one card.Completely ignore what the card means as a whole and narrow your 
focus to just the feather. Ignore everything else. This may be hard to 
do, but make an effort. The feather alone has a message for you. That 
message can be on any level-practical, psychological, or spiritual. Listen 
quietly for the message in the feather. Don't rush.Let it come to you from within.When you have heard the message, write it down.
 
=== FILE_041 ===
INTEGRATION: 
ARMOR, BLINDFOLDS,AND FEATHERSHello, and welcome to our integration class for armor, blindfolds, 
and feathers. Do you have the notes for all those earlier classes 
handy? We hope so, because you'll be able to use them in this class. 
You'll see how in a few minutes.We'll tell you a secret at this point, about how and why the 
three images of each series are chosen. Think of the series of the 
past-crowns, pillars, roses and lilies; paths, mountains, and crosses; 
moons, stars, and pools; horses, banners, and suns. This time it was 
armor, blindfolds, and feathers.In each series, the integration class revealed a common denominator, a binding factor, a deep link that joined symbols with nothing obvious in common. This joining is a little piece of magic. If 
the connection seems logical in hindsight, that is only because the 
magic was successful.The secret we're going to tell you is that, in every case, we have 
no idea at the beginning how it's going to turn out in the end. A 
group of three images present themselves to us when we need them 
and, essentially, ask us to have faith that all will be well.We only discover how that happens a little bit before you do. 
The final piece of magic happens when we sit down to create the 
integration class for the series. This series has been no different 
than the ones before it.But this time, we're going to engage you in the process. In the 
interest of true integration, we're going to issue you a two-part 
challenge.First, look through your deck and take out all the cards we have 
studied in the three classes that make this series-armor, blindfolds, and feathers. We won't tell you what they are.If you have your notes from those classes handy, there's nothing 
to it. If not, search your deck and your memory and do the best you 
can. Make your best effort.
Now that you have done what you can do, let us give you the 
"official" list:The FoolThe four KnightsThe EmperorPage of WandsThe LoversKing of PentaclesThe Chariot2 of SwordsThe Wheel of Fortune8 of SwordsDeathTemperanceThe SunJudgementThere are, as you know, other cards we might have included, but 
these are the ones we chose to work with. Some of the cardsDeath and three of the Knights-are used twice.The second part of the challenge is to look back over the ideas, 
concepts, and information of our classes on armor, blindfolds, and 
feathers. Once again, search your memory and your notes if you 
have them. Dig deep beneath the surface and find your own way to 
connect these three dissimilar images with a single magical bond of 
meaning.You'll need some time to do this, so take it now. Do you need 
a hint on how to accomplish this task? If so, do the following, but 
only after you have read all the instructions.
Contemplation 
and Reading
First, close your eyes, breathe, and relax.Surround yourself with darkness.Clear your mind of thoughts and images and rest.Now, allow the word "armor" to enter your thoughts and, with it, the 
pictures of armor in the cards as they arise in your mind's eye. Don't 
force it. Let it simply happen.As you visualize the images of armor in the cards, allow yourself to 
remember the main ideas about armor as a symbol. Let this happen 
without effort. If nothing comes to mind right away, just keep at it. In 
time, the issues of armor will come to you of themselves.Whenever this happens, open your eyes but stay in a relaxed and meditative state.Write down what you have come to understand about the 
symbol of armor.Then, close your eyes again, and repeat the process with the symbol of 
the blindfold.Finally, repeat the entire process with the image of the feather.When you have done all this, which may take only a few minutes or 
perhaps a little longer, repeat the contemplative process one more time. 
Allow the main principles of armor, blindfolds, and feathers to swirl 
together in your mind until they begin to reveal what connects them. 
Once again, write down what you have seen.Do all this as well as you can, but don't worry at all about the results. 
Just do it. Do it now.
The number of ways to see the connection between these symbols 
is surely more than one, and each way will have its own nuances. 
Let us share with you our own results from the very process you 
just attempted.The main issues of armor are two:First, it is a practical and necessary response to the danger of 
lethal battle, especially if it is necessary to face that danger regularly 
and frequently. Though the danger may be physical, psychological, 
or spiritual, and each requires its own kind of armor, the essence 
remains the same. In this case, armor is a symbol of personal and 
private courage and a readiness to accept an endless challenge.The second issue of armor is ceremonial rather than practical. 
It is a sign of status, of the wealth and power that comes from a 
successful career as a warrior. It is the sign of many battles fought 
and survived and many more to come. In this case, armor is the 
symbol of a public duty and an earned honor.All together, the issues are lethal danger, private courage, and 
earned honor.Blindfolds are another matter altogether. Here, the two issues 
revolve around true sight and are represented by two cards. In one, 
the blindfold is a symbol of the inner vision that alone can see the 
truth. In the other, it is a symbol of the outer darkness that must be 
shed if the vision of the truth is to be accomplished.A blindfold may be any experience, epiphany, understanding, 
or path that shuts out the clamor of external reality and allows wisdom to arise from within. A blindfold may also be any powerful 
deed, feeling, or thought, any memory or present reality, that 
focuses attention on itself to the exclusion of a deeper wisdom. 
Such a blindfold may or may not be a prelude to initiation.The issues here are the light of inner truth and the darkness of 
distracting reality, the state of steady wisdom and the continuing 
trials and challenges of initiation.
Fire and air are the two issues of the symbol of the feather. Air 
can rise and fall at will with delicacy, grace, and perfect control. Fire 
rises of itself always and implacably upward, though it accepts the 
discipline of moving downward when it must. Both elements are 
most at home and at their most perfect when they are at their highest. But both can function and do their duty below.The image of the feather is the symbol of flight. It is the buoyant, upward yearning of air and the final purifying consummation 
of fire. As both air and fire, the feather is a symbol of the power 
to move at will between above and below. It is a major symbol of 
emergence and return.The reality of armor is heavy and thick, but it is the symbol of 
courage, virtue, and spirit.Blindfolds are a form of real darkness that symbolize the struggle for and experience of inner light.Feathers in reality are utterly delicate and frail. But theirs is the 
formidable task of carrying the light and pure down to an imperfect 
world and the heavy and impure upward to a state of perfection.All three images are symbols of great and necessary good distilled from humble and unlikely forms.This is a great lesson-one to be remembered, and one that will 
come in handy in the rough and tumble arena of a tarot reading.This brings us to the final stage of an integration class, which is 
to use what we have learned in a reading.First, shuffle the universe of cards we have been working with 
in this class.Next, ask a question that needs answering. Write it down. 
Clarify and refine your question so that, as much as possible, it asks 
exactly what you want to know.Finally, create a spread of your choice from the cards you just 
shuffled. Answer your own question, using everything you know 
about the cards in your spread, including the symbolism we have 
just discussed.
 
=== FILE_042 ===
SYMBOL SPREAD: 
ARMOR, BLINDFOLD, AND FEATHERThis spread is based upon the symbols studied in our classes on 
armor, blindfolds, and feathers. It is different from the other 
spreads we have worked with so far because there are several ways 
to approach each of the positions.As you have learned, there are many layers of interpretation 
to these, and in fact most, symbols. This spread gives you the 
flexibility to experiment with these different ways of looking at 
each of the symbols, as each position can be looked at from one 
of several perspectives.The layout is a simple three-card spread, consisting of the 
Armor (position #i), the Blindfold (position #2), and the Feather 
(position #3). Each card will have one of three potential symbolic 
meanings.Armori. What protects you2. What strengthens you3. What weighs on youBlindfoldi. What you're not seeing2. What is blocking you from seeing the truth3. How best to access your inner visionFeatheri. How to transcend your current circumstances2. Where to find your connection to the divine3. What you can do to lighten up
Begin by placing the cards face down like this:Before you turn over the cards, talk with your querent a little to get 
a sense of their question. Is it an emergent, practical issue, or does 
the question deal with more spiritual concerns?Next, turn over the cards one at a time and look at the previous options for each of the symbol positions. Choose the one 
that makes the most sense within the context of the question. (For 
longer readings, you can interpret each card from more than one 
perspective.)Other ways to choose:• Let the card suggest which is most appropriate to your 
question.• Let your querent choose which is most important to them.These are our suggestions. As you review your class notes, you may 
find other ways of interpreting these symbols you can to add to the 
list. The more you understand the symbols, the richer your readings 
will become.
 
=== FILE_043 ===
CASTLES, CLOUDS, 
GARDENS
 
=== FILE_044 ===
CASTLESHello, and welcome to our class on the symbolism of castles in 
tarot. Unlike the symbols in our earlier classes, castles do not have 
an ancient and universal history. They are strictly European and 
medieval in origin. But they are powerful symbols nonetheless.This is the next-to-last group of classes in our series on imagery and intuition in tarot. When we are done, we will have only 
begun to explore the symbolism of the imagery of the deck. Since 
there's so much left to do and no way for us to finish in a formal 
framework, we thought we would give you a method to do the work 
yourself if you wanted to.To that end, this lesson will be different from earlier ones. 
It will use provocative questions and contemplation as the main engine for learning, with a little information derived from research 
added to round out and soften the process.
For the moment, you won't need your deck, but keep it handy.Castle 
Contemplations
Here's the first question: How do you know a castle when you see 
one?Think about this for a minute. Now write down your thoughts.Most people know what a castle looks like because it's an image that 
belongs to our cultural heritage. But there are structures that look 
rather like castles but aren't.That brings us to our second question: Can 
you distinguish, by looking, a castle from a fortress? From a walled city? 
From a palace? From a tower or a strongly built house?Think about this and write down your answer.A castle is a recognizable structure, and recognizable structures have 
known functions. A house, a church, a skyscraper, a pyramid-all are 
built to serve a particular purpose.The third question is: What purpose does a castle serve?This is a difficult question because the answer is complex and manyfaceted. Contemplate this question for a couple of minutes. Now write 
down what arose in your contemplation.From this point on, the questions get more subtle and harder to 
answer.In a previous lesson, we talked about how ordinary man-made objects 
often become symbols.That's because the practical uses of such objects in everyday life somehow parallel or reflect analogous functions in our 
inner lives.
A castle is like that.A real structure with practical functions, it is the 
symbol of a powerful, pre-existing inner structure. Its walls, gates, and 
towers; its slit windows, moat, and drawbridge; its great hall and keep; 
its well and storehouses; its armory and stables; its private apartments, 
secret staircases, and escape routes-all of these real architectural features are an outpicturing of the hidden inner home and fortress we 
carry within us.Your home is your castle, they say, and that is as true 
inside as outside.The fourth question is: As a symbol, a living energy within, which of a 
castle's ordinary functions are paralleled or reflected in you?This question is fairly demanding, so take a little extra time to contemplate it. 
Now write down what came to you in your contemplation.At this point, we want to lead you a little bit with more focused 
questions.In the time and place where castles arose, they were, among other 
things, the seat of private secular power, a counterpoint to the public 
spiritual power of the church.Each castle was the home of a lord and his family, fortress to his garrison of knights and soldiers, and center of order, law, peace, and safety in 
the midst of a lawless and violent landscape. A castle was a stronghold 
of privacy and personal power, a place where no outside or superior 
authority need be acknowledged or obeyed. The lord of a castle could 
do as he liked in his own domain. The quality of life within a castle 
depended entirely on the character of its lord, which the power of the 
castle distilled to its essence-benign or despotic, heroic or villainous, 
social or solitary.
All of this was true in its original reality. It is also true, at this moment, 
one way or another, inside of you as symbol.The fifth question is: Can you find the analog or parallel of this absolute 
and private power in yourself?Contemplate this question for a couple of minutes. Now, write down 
what you discovered in your contemplation.As you have seen, castles served many purposes in the outside world as 
they also do in the world within.There is a way of dividing these purposes into the two primary energies of male and female that dominate 
esoteric tarot symbolism and personal psychology as well.The sixth and final question of this lesson has two parts:I.Which of the ordinary functions and energies of a castle are 
male and which are female?2.What analogous or parallel functions and energies can you find 
inside yourself?Take your time with this contemplation. When you are ready, write 
down what you discovered.You've done a lot of work by this time, so you deserve a break. 
What comes next will be relatively easy. The time has come to pick 
up your deck and look through it for cards that contain castles. 
Now you have some criteria to judge by, so it will be interesting to 
see what you come up with.
We are going to work with just four cards that contain clear, 
unambiguous castles. They are: The Chariot, the Ace of Wands, the 
2 of Wands, and the 4 of Wands.To be clearly and unambiguously a castle and nothing else, a 
structure needs both walls and towers surrounding an area no bigger, 
and often smaller, than a small village. The 2 of Wands shows only a 
portion of wall, but the wall is crenelated in a way so characteristic 
of a castle wall that we can assume it is one if we wish.Now let's look at these cards, first as a group and then at each 
in turn.As a group, the castles in all these cards share the important 
characteristic of being either white or gray. White castles in fairy 
tale, legend, and myth are always the homes of benign forces. In the 
esoteric universe, castles oddly play no part that we are aware of. But 
white is the color attributed to Kether, the Crown, in Qabalah and 
to the King in alchemy. Gray is attributed to Wisdom in Qabalah 
and to the veil that separates pure spirit from any manifest form or 
substance.Add these esoteric attributes of color to the general symbolic 
qualities associated with castles, and you have the overall meaning 
of castles in tarot. All of them are sources of high, powerful, and 
benign energies and gifts.
The ChariotThe castle in The Chariot is behind a wall that 
joins it to a city. This is a reference to the esoteric title of the card, The House of Influence, 
that brings all good things from above to below 
and from below to above. The castle is above, 
and the city is below.In a reading, the castle suggests the flow of 
good things into the querent's life from a source 
above and beyond themselves.Ace of WandsThe distant white castle on a hill is a symbol of 
virility and the procreative power.In a reading, this castle suggests that it 
is deeds that get results. It is a symbol of the 
potency of intent.
2 of WandsThe gray wall is part of a gray castle, seen from 
within rather than from outside and at a distance. 
It symbolizes the wisdom of the element of fire, 
the appropriateness of action.In a reading, this castle is the wisdom of 
taking the first step, of making a beginning.4 of WandsThis castle, with its white walls and red turrets, 
is a symbol of connection with the highest and 
purest motives and intent.In a reading, it suggests that what has been 
done so far will lead to a good and happy outcome.
A special caution is useful here. With castles, more than with 
the other symbols we have talked about, we feel that the general 
significance of the image is more important and a deeper source of 
intuitive information than the specific references in each card.When a castle catches your eye in a reading, look inside yourself for its meaning and remember what a castle is about. Only then 
add the particulars connected with the card in which it appears.In this class, we have tried to give you a general method for 
inquiring into the symbolic meaning of what you see in a tarot card. 
It's a three-step method.Step one is to ask provocative questions and then turn inward 
to find useful perspectives and knowledge through contemplation. 
The fact is that you know a great deal more than you think you do, 
and contemplation will bring that knowledge to the surface where 
you can see it.Step two is research. Acquire a good set of reference books and 
learn to do effective searches on the Internet. Find out what you 
can from the best and most reliable sources and information and 
add that to what you learned from contemplation.Step three is integration. Let inner and outer knowledge blend 
to produce a useful, internally consistent, and structurally sound 
picture or shape that holds the meaning you are looking for. Then, 
even without the stamp of approval of any external authority, what 
you discover will be, and remain, valid.If you learn to do this, we will have taught you a very fine lesson 
indeed.
 
=== FILE_045 ===
CLOUDSHello, and welcome to our class on clouds in tarot. Of all the objects 
in the visible world, clouds are the closest to not being objects at all. 
Clouds are always in our lives, even when they are nowhere to be 
seen. They pass above us most of the time, and we are hardly aware 
of them except as generalities. We might say, "It's a cloudy day" or 
"There's not a cloud in the sky!" or "It looks like rain" when the 
clouds look threatening. There's rarely even a notice of individual 
clouds.But questions arise when you do pay attention to them. What 
is a cloud? When you see one, what makes you say or think, "That's 
a cloud"? For example, you might well ask:How many kinds of clouds are there?How does a cloud come to be? What makes a cloud?Where are clouds found?What functions do clouds serve? What do they do?What is there in our inner selves that is cloudlike, to transform 
clouds from physical objects into symbols?Think about these questions. Contemplate them. Reflect on them 
slowly until the answers begin to arise from within. You will find 
that these answers themselves begin to form a cloud of knowledge 
that swirls around you and subtly changes your awareness.Let's begin to answer these questions on paper. Actually, all 
of these questions can be seen as facets of a single question. They 
can be answered as one, although the answer isn't short, or simple, 
either.
When we say "clouds," we are normally referring to the white 
puffy things that float above our heads in the sky. These are made of 
water vapor that rises by means of evaporation high into the atmosphere. There it cools and condenses into tiny crystals of ice or 
droplets of water that are light enough to float suspended in the air. 
These droplets gather and adhere in communities of ever-shifting 
shapes that we call clouds, blown on the wind until they return to 
earth as snow or rain.The highest of these is called cirrus, and they are made of ice. 
They float like feathers, white and wispy and very far away.Stratus clouds are lower but still made of ice crystals. They lie 
in layers, thicker and closer than cirrus clouds, and have distinct 
shapes that make patterns in the sky. These are the clouds that 
make dawns and sunsets beautiful with reflected sunlight.Cumulus clouds are towers of water vapor rising thousands of 
feet in the air, impressive things of massive proportions that hold 
the promise of rain and storm and thunder and lightning.Nimbus clouds hang low in the sky. They are ominous gray 
masses of moisture, hovering as close to the ground as clouds get, 
holding huge amounts of water that eventually come down as rain 
or snow. These are the clouds that make an overcast and gloomy day 
even when there's no precipitation. Sometimes they reach ground 
level as mist or fog.Together, these clouds are the moods of the sky. They constantly 
come and go, arise and disappear, and they are forever changing 
shape. This endless movement and ceaseless change gave rise to 
one of the oldest of all forms of divination, called aeromancy.Aeromancy is the general name given to reading signs, omens, 
and portents from events in the sky. This includes divination by 
wind, thunder, lightning, and the flight of birds as well as by clouds. 
Cloud divination specifically is called nephomancy and involves 
scrying with the shapes and movements of clouds over time. Hours, 
often days, of close observation go into a cloud divination, and there are old records of very detailed predictions with amazing predictive 
accuracy and depth. Nephomancy was a favorite of both Celtic and 
druid seers, but it has fallen into disuse in modern times. These 
days, no one has either the time or the ancient knowledge needed 
to read the clouds.
Nevertheless, clouds remain potent symbols of change. We do 
not personally see them arise, nor do we personally know where they 
go. They appear, affect us briefly, and then disappear without a trace. 
There is no more perfect symbol of the transitory than a cloud.In yogic tradition, thoughts and feelings are said to be clouds 
crossing, but not affecting, the clear sky of consciousness. They are 
to be observed, but no lasting importance need be given them since 
they arise and disappear constantly. There is a message here that 
might be useful for a tarot reader to remember when a querent's 
problems of the moment seem intensely important.Clouds also serve as veils, hiding or obscuring what is in, on, or 
behind them. They create a natural but indeterminate limit to what 
we can see. Airplane pilots and sailors speak of the range of visibility-what can be seen ahead before vision is obscured by clouds. 
Mist and fog, which are clouds that hang at ground level, add a sense 
of obscurity and mystery to our vision by limiting and blurring it. 
Clean edges and clear boundaries are lost in clouds, creating both 
uncertainty and a sense of possibility.Clouds separate what is above from what is below. Ordinary life 
is always lived below the clouds. What is above them is too rarified, 
too thin, too abstract to support the life we know. Above the clouds 
in the physical world, space extends away infinitely. In the inner 
world, it is the place of spirit, of heaven, of fairy tale and myth, of 
those things we speak of but rarely, if ever, experience.Apillar of cloud was said to have guided the tribes of Israel as they 
wandered in the deserts of Sinai. Angels appear from out of clouds or 
ride on them. Those who arrive in heaven are pictured as walking on 
clouds. The castle of the giant in the tale of jack and the Beanstalk rests on a landscape of clouds. The entire pantheon of Greek gods resides 
on Mount Olympus, above the clouds. When a person's head is in the 
clouds, their awareness is in a high and impractical place.
But clouds can also be harbingers of doom, gloom, and disaster. 
Storm clouds can bring flood and blizzard. The mushroom cloud 
of a nuclear explosion is a cloud of radioactive dust, the ultimate 
symbol of man-made death and destruction.The modern theory that accounts for the end of the entire race 
of dinosaurs, which ruled the earth for sixteen million years, is that 
a cloud of dust raised by a meteor strike was so vast and encompassing that it instantaneously changed the entire climate of the earth. 
It created an environment in which dinosaurs could not live.Clouds of volcanic ash and gas are symbols of one or another 
form of disaster. Clouds of smoke guarantee that there is fire below. 
Sometimes, the fire that causes the cloud of smoke is destructive, 
and sometimes it is not.When a steak is sizzling on the grill, the cloud of smoke that 
arises from it is savory and is a promise of the meal ahead. The 
cloud of smoke that arises from a stick of incense or a bunch of sage 
can create an atmosphere of peace, tranquility, and sacred space.Clouds can be signs and symbols of obscurity and dysfunction. 
We speak of clouded judgment, a mental condition in which any 
decision made is likely to be the wrong one. Clouded vision is the 
inability to see or understand truly and accurately. A cloud of gloom 
permeates the atmosphere of a time and place with emotional 
darkness. A cloud of suspicion hangs over and threatens the future 
of whoever is beneath it. Cloudy water is, by definition, impure, not 
altogether itself, bearing possibly unwanted material in suspension, 
and making the water perhaps dangerous and unfit to drink.When clouds are thick and pervasive over a landscape, depression and the incidence of suicide increases. When clouds are rare, 
the brilliant unshielded sun creates intense and fiery landscapes and 
temperaments.
But mostly, clouds are known for bringing the fertile rain. They 
are the visible symbol of the cycle of water that gives life to us all. 
We literally could not live without them.As the moods of the sky, they reflect our inner weather-stormy, 
whimsical, glorious, oppressive, dreamy, damp, cheerful, energetic, 
lazy, mysterious, frightening, promising.But they are also symbols in tarot. There they 
are first, foremost, and 
most frequently, symbols of 
the element of air, the element in which they appear. 
For this reason, they figure 
prominently in the entire 
suit of swords, which is traditionally associated with 
the element of air.Second, they are symbols of divinity and divine things, of mystery, the 
unseen, and the unknown. As 
such, clouds appear beneath 
the angels in The Lovers 
and judgement, at the four 
corners of The Wheel of 
Fortune and The World, and 
as the mysterious origin of 
the hand that appears in all 
the aces and the 4 of Cups. 
In the 7 of Cups, they are 
the sign of imagination, fantasy, and potential.
Whenever clouds in 
tarot catch and hold your attention, take the time to remember their 
general and tarot-specific symbolism. Add this knowledge to your 
reading, and it will immediately become richer and more fertile.
 
=== FILE_046 ===
GARDENSHello, and welcome to our class on gardens in tarot. As it turns out, 
this is a big subject-bigger than we had thought when we began to 
do the research. But the essence is still simple. In the end, after all 
is said and done, gardens are living metaphors for perfection.Everywhere in the world, where there is or was civilization, 
there have been gardens. In Egypt, although there are only very 
few archaeological remains, the ancient records speak of gardens 
belonging to temple, palace, and home. Shade, water, perfume, 
and fruit surrounded the senses with pleasure and relief from a 
relentless sun. Caged animals and birds entertained the viewer, who 
would, of course, have been either rich or powerful. The poor and 
the ordinary had no access to these pleasures.In China, gardens have been part of things since the beginning, 
which is about as far back as human history goes. The Chinese sensibility sees the universe as being on three levels-heaven above, 
earth below, and humanity in between. It was understood that the 
reason and justification for human existence was to balance and 
harmonize the powers of heaven and earth. The harmonious flow 
of yin and yang, of in and out breathing, of life and death, of blossoming and withering, was the sign of perfection. Peace was the 
peace within, when harmony was achieved. Nothing was greater 
than this. The rules, laws, and customs that ensured an harmonious 
existence bound emperor, mandarin, sage, soldier, and peasant. A 
Chinese garden was designed to reveal the principles of harmony to 
the eye, the heart, and the spirit.In Japan, the Zen garden was made out of sand, gravel, and 
stone. The Japanese predilection for contemplation, for solving 
koans, made of seemingly irresolvable contradictions and impossibilities, was incarnated in beautiful, serene puzzles that taught the 
mind and the soul through the eye. A Zen garden was not made to 
be walked through but to be observed while seated in meditation or while drinking tea in a ritual that paralleled the nature of the garden 
on a deep level.
The Middle East had its own version of the metaphor of garden 
as perfection. Our modern word "paradise" comes from the Persian 
"pardeiza," which meant "walled or enclosed garden."In a Persian garden, a verdant oasis arose from an and landscape-literally a heaven on earth. It was a formal garden, an ideal 
realized in a perfect aesthetic. Although Persia had several types 
of gardens, built to different standards, the most ideal was built 
around a central pool, which had four streams rising from it and 
flowing to four quadrants. This pattern was derived from descriptions of Eden in the Old Testament.When the Mongols invaded Persia, they took the Persian garden 
with them to India and mixed with it their own grandeur and epic 
style to create gardens in which whole palaces were an integral part 
of the overall design. The most famous example of a Mogul-Persian 
garden is the Taj Mahal.In Islam generally, the garden is a metaphor for paradise, a place 
of perfect delight and a reward for living and dying in a virtuous 
manner. The promise of this reward is enough by itself to motivate 
people to martyrdom.Islam, in the form of the Moors, brought their gardens to 
Spain and Italy. Spain, in particular, adopted the Moorish style 
in many things, including gardens. Moorish gardens are like open 
living rooms, halls, and rooms containing fountains, potted trees, 
and flowers; they are hidden behind outer walls and inside of 
and between galleries, but they are open to the sky-completely 
private and secluded from worldly eyes but visible to the eye of 
God.In Italy, the lineage of gardens comes primarily from Rome. The 
Roman garden, like Rome itself, was practical and hedonistic. People 
needed water and shade for relief from the hot Mediterranean sun, so Roman gardens were cool retreats. They were built around grottos, 
caves, and mountain hollows. Shaded paths led to fountains; porticos 
bordered canals, and baths could be found cooled by sea breezes. 
Everywhere there were statuary and architectural adornmentssmall open buildings made of roofs supported by columns, trellises 
covered with vines, topiary and obelisks, vases containing trees and 
flowers, and benches for resting. The garden was pure enjoyment for 
the body and the senses, a place to rest and revive.
The Italian garden became the exact model for the formal 
English garden of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. 
Roman landscape architecture was copied scrupulously and gave 
the English landed gentry the additional pleasure of a hugely conspicuous status symbol. To the grandiose and formal, the English 
added the esoteric and symbolic. This came in the form of mazes 
and labyrinths made of box hedges, and small but elaborate and 
exquisite temples built to embody the principles of Freemasonry, 
which was a powerful influence in the political and intellectual life 
of the time.But Europe had its own tradition of medieval gardens. There 
were herbers, which were small gardens enclosed by low walls. They 
had turf seats around the perimeter and beds of fragrant herbs in 
the center. The herber, though small, was a formal garden, fragrant 
and meditative, a place of deep relaxation and retreat.Then there was the flowery mead, which was a meadow of 
closely mowed grass artistically covered with wildflowers. It was a 
place to walk, run, lie down, picnic, and play. There were also utilitarian gardens where vegetables, spices, and medicinal plants were 
grown. These could be found on the grounds of every monastery 
and hospital.Manor gardens all over Europe included statuary, arbors, gazebos, cloistered walkways, lattices and trellises, terraced lawns, and 
parterres (made of colored sand, gravel, stone, or flowers, which made patterns that could be seen from above from windows or 
hills). An extension of the manor garden, which could be very large 
all by itself, was the park. The park added woodlands and meadows 
and was stocked with animals and birds for hunting.
Renaissance villa gardens were another form of extravagance 
for the rich and powerful of Europe. These gardens tended to be 
rambling, informal, and pretty; their winding paths, fountains and 
statuary, trees and flowers were chosen for scent and beauty and 
were interspersed with hidden benches for trysting lovers. These 
gardens were constructed purely for pleasure.In modern cities, we are all familiar with botanical gardens, which remind urban dwellers that nature does exist and is 
pleasant.Of all the many kinds of gardens that we have no space to 
describe here, there is one more, a special kind, that needs mention because it serves a purpose we should include in our theme of 
gardens as metaphors for the high and perfect. That is the Mary 
garden.A Mary garden is a development of religious nature symbolism 
in which the figure of the Virgin Mary is surrounded by some of her 
symbolic flowers. This is a meditative garden whose entire purpose 
is to use flower symbolism to evoke Mary's special spirit and the 
religious issues that are connected with her. The fullest impact of 
such a garden is said to come from first cultivating and then beholding it. In this way her praises are proclaimed and meditated on. The 
garden tells her story in a way similar to a medieval rose window or 
illuminated book of hours. Among the flowers most sacred to Mary 
are the rose and lily, a repeated theme in tarot.Finally, we need to speak of the quintessential garden: the 
Garden of Eden. In the creation story at the foundation of three 
religions, humanity is born in the garden. It is in this garden that a 
human being knows bliss, innocence, and perfection. It is from this condition that man and woman were expelled and to this condition that they hope to return. It is here, in the garden where they 
were born, that they are what they were meant to be. This garden is 
perhaps the ultimate religious, mystical, philosophic, and esoteric 
goal and the greatest of all symbols.
Now let's look at gardens in the cards themselves. Find the 
cards in your deck that have a garden in them. As usual, it isn't altogether clear which cards contain what we're looking for. But in this 
case, it is less important than in most. All the modern meanings in 
tarot derive directly from or are colored by the esoteric mindset 
and preoccupation of a century ago.In that universe of Qabalistic and alchemical symbolism, there 
is only one garden-Eden. Every card that clearly contains, or even 
hints at, a garden is speaking of Eden in one way or another.Maybe the one thing to remember about the source of meaning in tarot from the nineteenth century onward is that the entire 
deck and every card in it is a picture of the Tree of Life in whole or 
in part. The Tree of Life stood at the center of the Garden of Eden 
and overshadowed it. The Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, 
whose fruit caused the Fall, is said to be only a branch of the Tree of 
Life, as is every other tree that bore every fruit that was good and 
nourishing for humanity to eat.In tarot, every garden refers to Eden-to innocence, bliss, and 
perfection; to order, peace, and safety; to cultivation-of both inner 
virtue and outer reward. Rather than speak of the specific intent of 
gardens in individual cards, remember these general issues instead. 
Before we finish, though, here are some references for two cards 
that you might find useful and enjoyable.
Ace of PentaclesThe Ace of Pentacles, like all the aces in tarot, 
is a divine gift, the gift of a whole world and an 
element of creation. The element is earth, all 
that is solid and real; the world is the world of 
manifestation, the stage where the drama of life 
is played out.In the Ace of Pentacles, that world and that 
element are presented as the gift of a gardenthe garden of earthly delights. In this garden is 
everything that sustains us and makes us happy. 
The real world, the one that we know and experience on a daily basis, is not a vale of tears and 
suffering but a place of joy. This is an affirmation 
and a promise of tarot.The StarThe Star is the landscape of Eden itself. In the 
original Golden Dawn symbolism, the landscape of this card contains two trees, and the 
urn pouring water on the ground creates four 
streams rather than five.The two trees were the Tree of Life and the Tree 
of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. In the RiderWaite-Smith deck, only the Tree of Knowledge 
remains, bearing the ibis, bird of Thoth, master 
of knowledge. The Tree of Life is not shown here, 
presumably because it is everywhere.The four streams of the original symbolize the four rivers that flowed from the central waters of Eden-rivers of fire, water, air, and earth that together 
create the universe. Waite shows five streams, the symbol of the 
senses and the lower world of nature. It is possible that he uses the 
five streams as one of his occasional blinds that disguise a piece of 
secret esoterica.
The pool is likewise the source of all the waters, and the ripples 
in it are the symbol for the outward-flowing energy of all the four 
rivers that arise from it. All together, The Star is a picture of paradise before the Fall.Whenever you see a garden or a reminded of a garden in a tarot 
card, let it be an omen for good, and you won't be wrong. 
=== FILE_047 ===
INTEGRATION: 
CASTLES, CLOUDS, AND GARDENSHello, and welcome to our integration class for castles, clouds, and 
gardens. There are many castles in the world, an infinite number 
of clouds, and more gardens than you can count, including the 
ones in tarot. What makes all of this meaningful, what makes it all 
important, is that there is one castle, one cloud, and one garden 
that exist inside us all. That one has a billion variations, but there's 
only one for all that. If you can discover the meaning of that one 
inside yourself, you'll know it in everybody. Then you will become a 
very good reader indeed.Castle, cloud, and garden-these three images bring to mind a 
hundred issues that are linked together in thematic contrasts. Control, 
freedom, harmony; anxiety, unconcern, serenity; construction, process, growth; preparedness, spontaneity, cultivation-these are some 
thematic issues that occur immediately, but there are many more. Create your own and learn from each one. Each contrast and the 
issues that make it are keys. They unlock secrets. You yourself are 
a secret castle, an unknown landscape above the clouds, a hidden 
garden.
For a moment, let's look at just one word, one term from one 
thematic contrast-the word "control"-and see what can be 
learned from it. It's a simple word, but as a key, it opens a door to 
self-inquiry.Control, we think, is an issue for everyone. It lives in you and 
expresses as you. You can examine it with questions. For example: 
How good is your self-control? How well do you control your appetites, passions, and reflexive responses? Do you need to? Do you 
want to?To what extent do you feel you are in control of your life? Do 
you want to be? Do you make things happen? Let things happen? 
Help them happen?How do you feel about coercion, the exercise of control over 
others by force? If you have children or employees, or subordinates 
or dependents of any kind, do you approve of coercion as a means of 
control? Is there a limit? What is it? How do you feel when coercion 
is applied to control you?We are all controlled to some extent by social coercion, 
sometimes subtle and sometimes bare knuckled. Law, custom, 
convention, propriety, morality-all exercise a control over us pretty 
continuously. These are all issues of the castle-the walls of control 
constantly constrict and shape us. If we shape up, to the extent 
that we do, we are deemed acceptable and worthy of inclusion, 
protection, and reward. If not, to the extent that we don't, we are 
marginalized, rejected, excluded, and sometimes punished.How well do you fit in? How comfortable are you with the 
pervasive controls of society? Have you internalized these controls 
until they are a part of you? Do you openly rebel? Do you secretly 
rebel but pretend to fit in? Have you ever lived in a time or place where social controls were rigid and tyrannical? Have you ever 
imposed a tyranny of control on others?
We'll stop here, although we could go on. This is some of what 
arises from a single word that arises from a single image. The power 
of this process of self-inquiry is clear. It awaits you with a turn of 
a card, so there is power in that turning. The more you know, the 
more powerful the turn of a card becomes.Three-Card 
Reading
In tarot, knowledge is raw power, but technique makes that power use- 
able.The time has come to take out your deck. Look through it and pull 
out the first twelve cards that contain a castle, a cloud, or a garden. Put 
the rest of the deck aside and shuffle these twelve cards face down.Now ask yourself a question that truly needs an answer.Write it down. 
Carefully revise your question so that it asks exactly what you want to 
know, neither more nor less.Draw three cards from the stack of twelve and turn them up for a 
three-card reading. Pay careful attention to the castle, cloud, or garden 
in each card and read only those symbols and nothing else. Forget what 
the card means. Don't read reversals.Remember the specific tarot meanings of the symbol in each card. 
Remember the general meanings as well.Then look inside yourself for 
the expression of the one castle, cloud, or garden that lives in you as 
you.Take your time. Do a good reading.Now it's time for a little R & R after all the heavy stuff. Put away 
cards, paper, pen, everything.
journey 
for Rest 
and 
Relaxation
Close your eyes, breathe and relax, and listen.Above you are the clouds in the sky. Become aware of them.Beyond the clouds is a landscape, just above them. Go there now and 
look around.In the distance is a castle. It belongs to you. Go there.Enter and look for a room that contains a beautiful box. Find the box 
and open it.In the box is a key, the key to your own garden of perfect delight. Pick up 
the key and let it take you to the entrance of your garden.Enter your garden. Spend some time there. Observe, create, cultivate, 
and enjoy.Your garden brings rest to your mind, peace to your heart, serenity to 
your spirit, and pleasure to your senses. No harm can come to you here, 
nor can any harm be done by you. Enjoy, enjoy, enjoy until it's time to 
return.When you are ready to return, find the place where you entered your 
garden and stand before that entrance.Hold your key and let it take you to the room in your castle that contains the box.Put the key in the box and exit the castle into the landscape above the 
clouds.
Descend from the clouds and re-enter your body.Wiggle your fingers and toes. Become conscious of the room around 
you.Take two deep breaths and, when you're ready, open your eyes.Welcome back. 
=== FILE_048 ===
SYMBOL SPREAD: 
CASTLE, CLOUD,AND GARDENThis spread is based upon the symbols studied in our classes on castles, clouds, and gardens. This is a very simple, all-purpose spread 
that you'll find useful in addressing almost any type of question. 
You can use it as a stand-alone reading or as part of a longer, multi- 
spread session. Used in conjunction with another symbol spread (or 
other layout of your choice), the Castle, Cloud, and Garden spread 
can add a useful layer of perspective.The layout is a three-card spread. Begin by placing the cards 
face down, like this:
Castlei. What is within your control.The castle is your stronghold. It provides your resources and acts 
as your power base. This is where you have the fortitude to handle 
and/or change things, either on your own or with help.Cloud2. What is beyond your control.Clouds are a force of nature that you cannot personally affect. The 
card that appears in this position will address something that you 
do not possess the ability or resources to change. You may have 
already discovered that attempting to do so is futile. Remember, 
however, you always have control over the way you choose to react 
and behave.Garden3. What can be cultivated to bring you pleasure.A garden brings rest to the mind, peace to the heart, serenity to 
the spirit, and pleasure to the senses. The energy of the card in 
this position can be worked with to bring you one or more of these 
things. Even when the card appears to be uncomfortable, it contains the seed of a fruitful outcome.
 
=== FILE_049 ===
RIVERS, TOWERS, 
ANGELS, TEMPLES
 
=== FILE_050 ===
RIVERSHello, and welcome to our class on rivers in tarot. We are coming 
to the end of our current work on symbolism, and this last series 
of four images will, we hope, complete the work in essence, even 
though there's a great deal more to explore in detail. In this completion, we hope a certain understanding or feeling will begin to light a 
darkness you might not even have noticed was there.Rivers are delicate and complex because they are alive, and 
because they're alive, they can be understood both plainly and 
deeply. Rivers are real, and they are mythic and symbolic. The best 
place to start to understand them is in reality. There they have a 
form, a function, and a process that allows myth and symbol to 
arise.
We'll begin by asking a by now familiar pair of questions:i. What is a river?2. How do you know one when you see one?A river is a large stream of flowing water. The general scientific term 
that includes all flowing water is "stream."Every river is different, but all rivers are alike in some things. 
Just as, say, a human being has a head, a torso, arms, legs, and feet, 
all rivers have a source, a channel, tributaries, and an end. And just 
as each person has an identity, each river does also.A river arises from a source-always. A river flows downwardalways. Its flow is fresh water-always. It comes to an end-always. 
But each of these generalities has variations.Some rivers are born from springs of fresh water that emerge 
from the earth. Some begin as melted ice from a glacier. Some 
begin their flow from a lake or swamp. Often a river starts as rain 
or melted snow on a mountain. All of these sources can be found at 
high places on the earth. And, of course, all of these sources have 
their own origin in the clouds.Water begins high and seeks the lowest level it can find. From 
high ground there is always a path that leads downward. The 
quickest path downward from its source becomes the channel of a 
river. When it can go no lower, the flow of a river comes to an end.According to the magickal philosophy of tarot, it is exactly in 
this way that manifestation of all kinds takes place. This is the way 
the world is said to be created and is also how we create our own 
lives. Take a moment to think about something in your life now 
that is seeking the level of manifestation.Rivers start small, maybe no bigger than a trickle of raindrops 
running down a tree trunk or a hillside. These rivulets join where 
their courses meet in a single larger downward-moving channel. Smaller channels meet again and again in larger ones. They form 
creeks and streams, which may in turn form pools and lakes, whose 
overflow pours their contents ever downward in small rivers that 
converge in ever-deeper, ever-wider channels. From these tributary 
sources rivers emerge-flows of water so large, so well defined, that 
they acquire names and identities.
In the same way, each human life begins as a flow of pure possibility and, little by little, is influenced and added to by a multiplicity 
of other lives. In time, a new, unformed, and delicate infant awareness becomes a full, well-defined adult stream of consciousness.River 
Memory 
Exercise
For a moment, close your eyes. Breathe and relax.Let your memory wander back, up the stream of your personal history 
toward its source.As you journey back in time, remember some of the 
streams of life that entered and joined with yours to make you who you 
have become. Be aware that you are the sum of many living streams, not 
just yours alone.Take two deep breaths and, when you're ready, open your eyes.Some rivers reach the sea. Some end in lakes, some in swamps or 
bogs. Some rise directly into the sky as they evaporate under the 
heat of a desert sun. And some disappear below the ground into the 
darkness of the mysterious earth. Each life, too, has its own style 
of ending.From beginning to end, the essence of a river is freshness. It 
is fresh water, the water that directly sustains the life of all airbreathing creatures, as well as the creatures that swim in it and live beneath its surface. It is flowing fresh water that cleans with its 
purity and movement and feeds the surrounding earth the moisture 
it needs for life.
Flow 
of Life 
Experience
Once again, close your eyes. Breathe and relax.Take a long moment to look deep inside yourself until you find the 
freshness of the steady flow of your life.When you have done this,expe- 
rience it fully. It will make you new. If you can't find that freshness right 
away,find a way to invoke it. It is there inside you always. It is the essence 
of your life.Take a deep breath and, when you're ready, open your eyes.In its flow, a river picks up and carries with it the soil from its bed 
and banks and the organic decay of all that lives and dies in it. 
The silt formed from this material becomes a rich organic compound that a river often deposits at its mouth, creating a delta of 
super-rich soil. The entire civilization of Egypt, past and present, 
depended on the ever-repeating Nile floods to bring water and rich 
soil to its desert banks for farming. For lack of these floods over a 
period of years, a whole empire once built around the Nile failed 
and disappeared.Rivers would always, of themselves, be pure, flowing fresh water 
but for the presence of civilized humanity along their banks, which 
pours into them its own endless stream of toxic waste. Rivers carry 
away the poisonous by-products of human existence, including 
their sins. It is at this point, at the juncture of human shortcomings 
and natural perfection, that both rivers and lives become mythic 
and symbolic.
In reality, a river is a life, a living thing in its own right, in the 
way that all the forms of the natural earth are alive. But in myth and 
symbol, rivers enter human consciousness and dwell there as stories 
and lessons.The great rivers of the world each have an identity that 
influences the human landscape through which they flow. The 
Nile, the Amazon, the Mississippi, the Congo, the Danube, the 
Ganges only need to be mentioned to evoke the feeling-tone of 
the world that surrounds them. Speak the names of the Thames, 
the Seine, the Rio Grande, and you can see the places through 
which they flow and conjure their histories. Stories, myths, and 
legends surround real rivers and give birth to rivers that live only 
in our imagination.Let me give you a couple of examples. These are just the short 
versions of elaborate tales, but you'll get the idea.It is said in India that the Ganges is a holy river. In fact, it is the 
holiest of all rivers, and everyone in India comes to it on pilgrimages, at times of birth and death, and to wash away their sins.The Ganges arose in the following way. An ancient king had 
6o,ooo sons, and it became necessary for the king to send all his 
sons on a quest. In the course of that quest, they unnecessarily 
interrupted the deep meditation of a great sage. The sage, aroused 
from his meditation, saw that the young men were the cause of his 
disturbance, and he reduced all 6o,ooo of them to ashes with a 
single glance. Thereafter, the sons of the king remained as troubled 
spirits, unable to enter heaven, permanently weighed down by the 
consequences of their folly.Another younger son of that same king prayed with all his 
pure heart that his brothers be cleansed of their sin and freed 
from their bondage. The gods heard his prayer. Brahma, the creator of the world, collected sweat from the feet of Vishnu, the 
maintainer of the world. From this holy moisture, Brahma created 
the goddess Ganga and gave her the task of descending to earth to purify the ashes of the king's 6o,ooo sons, so that they could at 
last attain paradise.
Ganga was miffed at being given a task that she felt was less than 
appropriate for her, and she swept down in three great torrents that 
would have flooded the earth had not Shiva, god of destruction, 
caught the waters on his brow and broken their fall. Being propitiated by the king's young son, Ganga followed him to the sea and 
then to the underworld to fulfill her mission.When Mother Ganga fell to earth, she came down on the summit Mount Meru, the peak that is said to be the center of the earth. 
She encircled the golden city of Brahma, which is located on the 
summit, nine times before dividing into four streams that flowed 
down the mountainside in the four cardinal directions. These four 
rivers flowing down from the top of the center of the world created 
the world pyramid that floats on the ocean of the cosmos.Ganga's descent to earth in three torrents and her division into 
four rivers correlates with the myth of the Seven Ganges, which 
Hindus today identify with the seven rivers of India. Because her 
waters were touched by all three of India's trimurti, or trinity, of 
Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, the Ganges is said to be the essence of 
holiness, which purifies all she touches.The Ganges is a river in the real world that has entered mythology and become a symbol. Now let's look at some rivers that rise 
directly from mythology itselfIn Greek mythology, there are five rivers that flow within or 
around Hades, the underworld. These are:i. Acheron-river of woe, separating the land of the living from 
the land of the dead. The ferryman Charon would take newly 
dead souls across the river into Hades at the place guarded by 
Cerberus, the dragon-tailed, three-headed dog. Cerberus let 
souls enter but does not let them leave.
2. Cocytus-river of lamentation. To cross the river Acheron, 
a soul needed to pay Charon with a coin called an obol, which 
was placed in the mouth of the deceased before a proper cremation. Those who could not pay had to wait for ioo years 
on the banks of the Cocytus, which eventually flowed into 
Acheron.3. Phlegethon-river of fire, which burned but never consumed 
fuel. In Dante's Divine Comedy, Phlegethon flows with boiling blood and is part of the seventh circle of hell, reserved for 
tyrants, murderers, and those guilty of sins of violence.4. Lethe-river of forgetfulness. Drinking from this river caused 
total loss of memory. Before reincarnation, souls were made to 
drink the waters of Lethe so they would not remember past 
lives when they were reborn.5. Styx-river of hate, another river that surrounds Hades and 
circles it nine times. It was in this river that Achilles was dipped 
by his mother when he was an infant to give him complete protection and therefore immortality. Only his heel, by which his 
mother held him, did not enter the water. It was through this 
small vulnerability that death finally came to Achilles, by way of 
a poisoned arrow shot through his heel.The Styx was so respected by the gods that they swore 
oaths by it. If a god gave his oath on the River Styx and failed 
to keep his word, he was forced to drink from the river itself 
The water was said to be so foul that the god would lose his 
voice for nine years.In later classical times, the legends of the Styx and the 
Acheron were joined, and it was across the Styx that Charon 
was said to row his ferry.
Four of the rivers, Acheron, Cocytus, Phlegethon, and Styx, 
met in a great marsh at the center of Hades where they ended 
their flow.These myths, legends, and stories do not find their way into tarot, 
but they play an important part in the spirituality of their times 
and places. Specific to tarot in its symbolism is the mythology of 
Eden, contained in the literature of Qabalah. It is a large and very 
rich story, with many embellishments and meanings, but here we'll 
give just enough to help us find the rivers in tarot, which are mostly 
invisible and as important as they are hidden.It is said that a river arose in Eden from out of the roots of 
the Tree of Life. That river divided into four, each of which flowed 
from the Tree of Life into the garden in one of the four cardinal 
directions. Each river flowed with the energy of one of the four 
elements attributed to the letters of the name of God, who created the garden. So there was a river of fire, a river of water, a 
river of air, and a river of earth. All of these rivers can be found 
in tarot, but where? In the qabalistic story, these four rivers ran 
through and then out of Eden, to form from their energies the 
four worlds that together make the world that we know, and also 
make us what we are.In tarot, the elemental world formed from the river of fire is the 
entire suit of wands. The river of water becomes the world of the suit 
of cups. The river of air becomes the world of the suit of swords. And 
the river of earth becomes the world of the suit of pentacles.
Elemental 
River 
Meditation
Close your eyes. Breathe and relax.Surround yourself with darkness and rest there for a moment.Now, in the darkness of your own original consciousness, see one of 
the four rivers-of fire, water, air, or earth-and feel it flowing through 
you. Do this until the feeling is clear and strong. Remember the feeling 
so you can describe it later.It is time to return.Become aware of your surroundings and, when you are ready, open 
your eyes.These four elemental rivers have another form of expression in tarot, 
even less visible than the suits. Take a moment to look through your 
deck for The High Priestess, The Emperor, The Hierophant, The 
Lovers, and The Chariot.You may well know by now that each of the Major Arcana is 
said to be a path on the Tree of Life, which in Qabalistic terms is 
the shape of each of the four worlds. In the middle of the Tree of 
Life is a vast space, called the Abyss. The Abyss separates divinity 
from both spirit and nature, above from below. This division exists 
in each of the four worlds and also in each of us.The vastness of the Abyss is crossed by the five rivers of Eden: 
the original headwaters and the rivers of the four elements. The 
High Priestess has the astrological attribution of the moon. Her path 
begins in Kether, the Crown, the very top of the Tree of Life, and 
flows across the Abyss to Tiphereth, Beauty, at the spiritual center of 
the tree. Hers is the original river from which all others arise.
The astrological attribution of The Emperor is Aries. His is the 
river of fire that crosses the Abyss from Wisdom to Beauty. The 
Hierophant is Taurus, the river of earth that crosses the Abyss 
from Wisdom to Mercy. The Lovers is Gemini, the river of air 
that crosses the Abyss from Understanding to Beauty. And The 
Chariot is Cancer, the river of water that crosses the Abyss from 
Understanding to Severity.These five rivers, the five paths, are all that connect above to 
below, in the world and in us. They hold us together and unify us. 
They let our natures flow freely between our highest and lowest 
potential. These are the hidden rivers in tarot and in us.Now look through your deck and take out all the cards that 
contain visible rivers. We'll list some of the many functions of rivers 
and then apply them to what we see in the cards.Rivers are and have always been:• sources of food and water, hygiene, and power• boundaries and borders• obstacles and defenses• highways and landmarksThey create beautiful, sometimes breathtaking, landscapes with 
their passing, like canyons, gorges, and waterfalls. They are symbols 
of flow; of time and timelessness; of change and changelessness; 
of purity, transformation, and rebirth; of life and the continuation of life. They are the home and even the embodiment of gods, 
goddesses, and spirits of all kinds, and they lend their identities 
and characters to the landscapes, real and mythic, through which 
they pass.
Rivers 
in Tarot 
Contemplation
Look at the cards you have selected that have rivers in them and assign 
to each of them one or more of the functions we have named or others 
you may think of yourself.Contemplate all the rivers in tarot and the function that each of them 
serves.If you remember what you discover in your contemplation of these 
rivers and apply this knowledge in your readings, they and you will be 
deepened, and your querents will be better served than they know. 
=== FILE_051 ===
TOWERSHello, and welcome to our class on towers in tarot. As our study of 
imagery approaches its conclusion, it feels more and more numinous. Symbols take on meaning like shapes emerging from a mist, 
and we see things we never knew, or onlyguessed, were there. Towers 
are going to be like that, and we hope you enjoy the process.Some things are the way they are with no help from us. The sun 
hangs in the sky; rivers run downhill; pools are cool, dark, and deep; 
and mountains rise above the plain, all by themselves. In themselves, they are innocent of meaning.Other things are what they are only because we made them that 
way. Castles, pillars, banners, and crowns perform the functions we 
invented them to perform and they would not exist but for us.All these things, natural and artificial alike, are real, and they 
exist in what we call the real world. These same things are also symbols, and they exist, among other places, in the symbolic universe 
of tarot. There they serve the purpose that all symbols serve, which 
is to explain us to ourselves.
And we need explaining. Our natural, physical shape and our 
normal qualities and abilities in themselves have no meaning and 
explain nothing. Those things make us creatures among other 
creatures, nothing more. And as creatures, like other creatures, we 
should be content with what we are. To some extent, for a part of 
us, that is true.As tarot readers, we are thoroughly familiar with this state of 
contentment. It comes to us in the form of querents, whose primary wish is to improve and enrich their personal experience of the 
natural world, not transform or explain it.But another, equal part of us is not content. We find ourselves 
and the world mysterious. We ask questions and have ambitions. 
We experience our natural state as limited, insufficient. We deny 
that limitation, both inner and outer, and strive for mastery, both 
inner and outer.The tower is, perhaps, of all the symbols in tarot, the prime 
symbol of our discontent and the quest for mastery, 
for power.The natural phenomenon from which the 
symbol of the tower arises is its opposite, and it 
is a symbol in itself. That is the force of gravity, 
the ultimate symbol of limitation, of all that holds 
us down. You could say that gravity as a symbol 
is the power of the status quo, of things as they 
are. Under the influence of gravity, nature changes 
in detail but never in its essentials. Gravity is the 
power of the real. It is the natural attraction that 
objects have to each other. It provides the ultimate orientation by letting all living things know 
without question which way is down and that that 
way is always the way to the center. The objective 
universe literally stands on this orientation, which 
could be said to be quintessentially feminine. In tarot terminology, it is the defining quality of the elements of earth 
and water and the suits of pentacles and cups.
Towers are masculine, symbols of transformation. They rebel 
against nature, using fire (will) combined with air (intelligence) to 
raise the material universe upward against the pull of gravity.Towers exude pride and a sense of power, the ambition and ability to rise above the natural state. Since they cannot be built by individuals acting alone, and since they demand enormous resources of 
wealth, skill, and time to build, they imply that the human impulse 
to verticality is not isolated but suffuses the human community.Of course, verticality occurs in nature, but in spite of that, the 
natural state tends to be flat, low, rooted, or floating or falling. All 
creatures on the earth, including human beings, fish, and birds, live 
in primary reference to the surface of the earth.Fish can and do go up and down in water as birds do in air. 
Both are buoyed by their medium and rise or sink in it at will, as 
land creatures can and do climb trees and mountains. But they all 
remain within their natural limits and boundaries.Only human beings can and do ignore and resist the natural 
limits of gravity. And the first successful attempt to rise above the 
surface of the earth is the building of towers. A tower is a proclamation of human resistance to limit.Natural manifestation of all kinds is always represented and 
understood as a spiritual or magical flow downward from high to 
low. The building of a tower reverses this process, moving from low 
to high. It reverses the energy of flow.When a tower is built, the builders seek their own elevation. 
They depend on no one and nothing but themselves, generating and 
manifesting power entirely from within. They are both giver and 
receiver. Even in the case of sacred building, as in church towers and 
steeples, or pagodas or minarets or ancient ziggurats, the physical 
elevation of these structures includes an implied statement of the 
triumphal power of the builders. This is the essence of the story of the Tower of Babel, where the pride, rebelliousness, and genuine 
power of humanity was rebuffed by God.
Real towers have been built since antiquity-some of them 
truly impressive even by modern standards.The Egyptian obelisk at Luxor, a pink-granite monolith that 
stands seventy-five feet high and weighs 230 tons, is more than 
3,300 years old and commemorates the reigns of the pharaohs 
Ramses II and Ramses III. It was given to France as a gift by the 
viceroy of Egypt in 1829 and stands to this day in the Place de la 
Concorde in Paris.The Ziggurat of Marduk/Etemenanki was a seven-tiered tower 
that stood 300 feet square and 300 feet high in the Babylon of the 
seventh century B.C., almost 3,000 years ago.The Colossus of Rhodes was built on the island of Rhodes on 
the edge of the Aegean Sea about 300 B.C. It was a statue built 
of bronze on an iron frame that rose iio feet high above a Sofoot base. It was one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, 
and inspired the French sculptor Auguste Bartholdi to create the 
Statue of Liberty. The two statues are identical in height from toe 
to head, stand in the same attitude, and serve the same function in 
the harbors they respectively command.The lighthouse of Alexandria was built about the same time as 
the Colossus, in the third century B.C. on the island of Pharos, just 
off the coast of Egypt near Alexandria. It was made of blocks of 
white stone and stood 440 feet high.These are not the only examples of great towers in the ancient 
world, but we mention them here as examples because they are the 
most famous and best known to us.In modern times, we have many building towers that exceed 
i,ooo feet in height and communication towers taller than 2,000 
feet. Under development as we speak is a skyscraper in the United 
Arab Emirates that will be 2,313 feet tall when it is completed 
around 20o8. A proposed solar chimney in New South Wales, Australia, has been found to be feasible from an engineering standpoint and will be 3,218 feet tall if it is built. Skyscrapers as tall as 
4,000 feet have been proposed, although none of them have passed 
the planning stage.
In the case of these enormous modern towers, their usefulness 
is questionable but the Freudian implications are unmistakable 
and unavoidable. The impulse and energy to build these extreme 
structures is sexual, phallic, but it is completely self-referential and 
therefore, in a sense, masturbatory. Perhaps this was true of the 
ancient towers as well. They are forms of ego incarnation, statements of achievement reaching as high as resources and technology 
permit. They redound to the glory of the communities that build 
them, proclaiming as always the wealth and power of the builders.But many towers are more modest in size and have practical 
uses as well.• They spread sound and light as bell towers and lighthouses.• They increase communication distances-as lanterns and 
bonfires in ancient times, as radio and TV towers in modern 
times.• They have been used as fortresses, prisons, storehouses, and 
chimneys and to perform experiments.• There are clock towers, watchtowers, and towers that support 
power lines and drilling equipment.• There are control towers at airports and harbors that guide 
planes and ships.• There are "ivory towers" used for self-imposed isolation and 
uninterrupted work.
They are used, in short, to live in, watch, communicate, support, 
store, defend, imprison, isolate, and experiment.The towers in tarot are no different in their uses and implications 
than the ones we have described. Look through your deck at this 
point and find all the cards that have towers in them. When you 
have done this, give to the towers in each card one or more of the 
uses or meanings we have discussed or others you have discovered 
for yourselfThink about what you have learned of towers in this class and 
apply their lessons to your readings and also to your understanding 
of yourself. This is actually a difficult and subtle task, but if you do 
it well, you will be handsomely rewarded.Towers 
of the 
Moon 
journey
Let's end with a journey. It will be a 
tower experience, and it will make 
what you have learned more personal, 
more immediate, and more useful. 
Look through your deck and find The 
Moon card. Place it face up in front 
of you and put the rest of the deck 
aside.Look at the picture in the card carefully. Examine its details and remember 
them, so that you can see the entire 
picture in your mind with your eyes 
closed.When you are ready, close your eyes. 
See the landscape of The Moon in all its detail. Remember everything. Open your eyes and look at the card again. Did you miss anything?
Once again, memorize the picture in detail. In a little while you are going 
to enter that landscape and have an adventure there.Now, close your eyes. Breathe and relax.Surround yourself with darkness and rest.Ahead of you in the darkness a light appears. Move toward it.The light is the light of the moon in the landscape of The Moon, shining through the open doorway of the card. In a moment, you will step 
through the doorway and enter the landscape of The Moon. This will 
happen on your next breath.Find yourself on the path that begins at the edge of the pool. Move along 
the path until you stand before the two towers. Although no entrance is 
immediately visible, there is a doorway somewhere in the base of each 
tower. Choose one tower and find the way inside.Enter the tower and explore what you find within. Let whatever happens there happen. Experience and enjoy.The time has come to return. Leave the tower and find your way back 
to the doorway by which you entered the landscape. Stand before it. In 
a moment,you will step through the doorway back into the restful darkness of your inner state.This will happen on your next breath.Float in that darkness for awhile. Breathe and relax.As you float, contemplate all that you have seen, heard, thought, and 
experienced about towers in this lesson.
It's time to return completely now. Become fully aware of your sur- 
roundings.Take a deep breath and, when you are ready, open your eyes 
but stay in a meditative state.Spend the next few minutes writing down the high points of your experience and your contemplation. 
=== FILE_052 ===
ANGELSHello, and welcome to our class on angels in tarot. In a way, this 
lesson will be different than any we've done in this series before. 
Up to now, the subject has always been a symbol, an object in the 
real world to which we first give meaning and then internalize as a 
description of our own most significant selves. But this time, we go 
to realms and beings beyond the real world and beyond ourselves, 
although those realms and beings touch and influence our own. 
We'll need to ask questions that are difficult to answer and look 
inside ourselves to discover what we believe. And then we'll need to 
ground whatever we discover in tarot and its uses.Let's begin, as we often do, with some questions. The subject 
of this class is angels, and that by itself produces the first question, 
which is: Do angels really exist? Do you or don't you believe in 
them? What, exactly, do you believe about them?That sounds like three questions, but it's really only one looked 
at from different angles.The second question is: What is an angel?Even if you don't believe in them or think they really exist, 
someone else probably does, so what do you think angels are for 
them?
The third question is: How would you know an angel if you 
saw one?It may well be that angels do exist, but not in reality, not in the 
real world, except possibly as occasional visitors. That brings us to 
the fourth question: If angels exist, but not in reality, where then? Is 
there a place or condition that truly exists but isn't real? How would 
that be possible?Actually, the lesson of tarot, which we've been learning for 
some time now, is that it is not only possible but also necessary. 
The ultimate lesson of angels in tarot is that much exists and much 
happens beyond the scope of the real. In fact, the mystery of reality 
may well be the greatest of all mysteries and perhaps can only be 
fathomed in a context larger than itself That is a big statement and 
may take awhile to consider.Here's an interesting corollary to that statement: There's a 
difference between what is real and what is true. It is possible for 
something to be either one and not the other. Each is a separate 
context, and each context has its own laws that produce very different results. It may well be that angels exist in truth and not in 
reality and affect reality only in special circumstances. Or perhaps 
there are other relationships between the true and the real that 
angels may help to elucidate.But whether real or true or both or neither, angels do have a 
time and a place in this world. They exist in religion, in magick, 
in philosophy, in art, in psychology, and in history. They were born 
with Judaism in the Middle East and entered the living streams of 
Christianity, Islam, and Hermeticism as well, where they reside to 
this day.Angels make their first appearance in the Old Testament. 
There they are called malachim, which in Hebrew means "messengers." Three times they came, performed jobs they were given to 
do by God, and departed-all without any fanfare at all. Because of the Jewish prohibition against making images, they were not 
clearly described or physically represented. Up to the time of early 
Christianity, angels were simply divine energies with no independent 
existence. Only later, in the Talmud, in Midrash, and in Qabalah, 
did they begin to increase in number, acquire names and attributes, 
and appear as central or major figures in religious stories.
Angels evolved, as all things do, and underwent two major evolutionary developments. From the bare-bones mention of mala- 
chim in the Old Testament, they developed in the early centuries of 
the Christian era into named beings, with descriptions, attributes, 
and, to some extent, personalities. A single book, whose authorship 
is unknown, was largely responsible for this evolutionary leap. The 
book is the powerful and influential Book of Enoch, written sometime between 200 B.c. and A.D. 200.Much of our popular angel lore comes from this book, in 
which is described the ascent of the prophet Enoch to heaven and 
what happened to him there. Enoch himself is transformed into 
Metatron, the highest angel in the hierarchy of angels, and seven of 
the best-known archangels are named and described, including the 
four that make their appearance in tarot.The Book of Enoch is mentioned in the Zohar as the source 
of Qabalistic magick and was praised by the early Christian fathers 
as being of divine origin. It is also a source of ritual and knowledge 
for Freemasonry and is perhaps the ultimate root of all Western 
Ceremonial Magick. To be valued by so many traditions that are normally opposed to each other is an honor given to very few works.A few hundred years later, angelology took another great 
leap forward in the form of the creation of hierarchies or orders 
of angels, a way to classify and organize angels that had begun to 
proliferate. The best known of these hierarchies was designed by 
Pseudo-Dionysus, probably a single pen name used by several anonymous authors of the fifth and sixth centuries, A.D. That hierarchy was an arrangement of nine choirs, or concentric circles, of angels 
surrounding God at the center. These choirs were arranged in three 
tiers of three, each more powerful and influential the closer they 
were to the center. These nine choirs, or circles, of angels are as 
follows:
i. Seraphim2. Cherubim3. Thrones4. Dominions5. Virtues6. Powers7. Principalities8. Archangels9. AngelsThe first tier of three is composed of seraphim, cherubim, and 
thrones. They form the innermost or highest court of angels, the 
only ones who have direct contact with the divine center.The middle tier includes dominions, virtues, and powers. They 
receive the divine word from the angels above them and pass it 
down to the lowest tier consisting of principalities, archangels, and 
angels, who carry out divine instructions and interact directly with 
humanity.Each choir of angels is said to have its own duties and responsibilities.Seraphim, as described in Midrash, were originally seen as firebreathing dragons who inhabited the highest heavens. As angels 
they remain associated with fire, but the fire is the love of God that 
is the original force of creation. Seraphim are rarely if ever directly 
perceived by humans.
Cherubim are known as the ones who pray and the ones who 
know completely. They are divine record-keepers, the scribes of the 
Book of Life, and the guardians of the Tree of Knowledge in the 
Garden of Eden. They also drive the divine chariot.Thrones are the divine chariot. Together, they create a moving 
throne on which the divine form is seated and on which the divine 
glory can be directly perceived by great souls.Dominions are the governors who regulate the duties and 
activities of all the forces of both the angelic and natural universes.Virtues are the angelic source of miracles and grace.Powers are the forces of divine protection, warriors on guard 
against the dark beings that inhabit the heavens and the earth.Principalities are the angels who watch over the destinies and 
activities of the tribes, cities, and nations of humanity.Archangels are, first and foremost, the leaders of the armies 
of heaven against the powers of evil. They bring divine messages 
directly to the particular human beings for whom they are intended, 
such as patriarchs and prophets, and carry out major divine missions on earth. They are also responsible for the activities of guardian angels and they lead human souls to spiritual realization.Angels are the most personal and intimate of angelic beings, 
the ones closest to humanity. They carry our prayers to heaven and 
help us directly where they can. There is at least one angel for every 
person, and there is said to be an angel for every star in the sky. The 
number of angels that are said to exist depends on the theologian 
or angelologist consulted. Generally, the number has ranged from 
millions to quadrillions. Suffice it to say that there are enough to go 
around.In tarot, we are concerned with only the archangels Raphael, 
Gabriel, Michael, and Uriel. These are four of the seven archangels 
named in the Book of Enoch. And, as a group, these four have acted 
together in a number of biblical adventures.
Michael is the archangel we know best, and he appears in the lore 
of all three Western religions as well as in the rituals of Ceremonial 
Magick. He is the warrior who, in the Book of the Revelation of 
St. John the Divine, defeated and imprisoned Satan. He also guides 
willing souls on the path to divine illumination. His name means 
"He who is as God."Gabriel is the archangel of prophecy, revelation, and 
resurrection. He guides souls from the realm of the spirit to 
embodiment in the womb and wakens them again from the 
slumber of physical death. It is Gabriel who tells Mary of the 
coming of Jesus and dictates the Koran to Mohammed. His name 
means "Mighty One of God."Raphael is the healer, the reconciler and uniter of all things 
wounded, sick, broken, and dysfunctional. His name means "Healer 
of God."Uriel is a messenger of both punishment and salvation, a force 
of fire and transformation. He is said to have warned Noah of the 
coming of the flood and to have punished Moses for his sin of omission. It is said that the angels gave Qabalah to humanity, and it was 
Uriel in particular who was charged with this task. It is Uriel who 
is said to guard the gates of Eden with his fiery sword. His name 
means "Light of God."At this point, it might seem that we are ready to examine the 
role angels play in tarot. Almost, but not quite. Before we do that, 
we need to return to the discussion arising from the questions we 
asked at the beginning of class.What is an angel? How would you know one if you saw one? 
Where, in what world or context, does an angel live? What purpose 
do angels serve in the structure of creation?Here are some short, possible answers to these questions. They 
are only suggestions, since nothing definitive can be said, but you 
may find them useful and thought provoking.
i. What is an angel?Originally, as we said before, they were mentioned rarely and only 
briefly described as divine messengers, without names or descriptions. They were extensions of God and not separate from their 
source. Over time, they became semi-autonomous energetic 
beings created out of divine names. They were capable of both 
error and rebellion and could cause problems as well as solve them. 
They could even be magically invoked to serve the purposes of a 
magician or called upon by individuals to help with their personal 
difficulties.2. How would you know one if you saw one?In another series of evolutionary steps, angels went from minimal 
verbal descriptions to visual representations in religious art as ethereal, vaguely male human forms, to modestly winged and robed but 
wonderfully built human forms without obvious gender but otherwise male in nature. This progressed to an inclusion of childlike 
and feminine forms, plus much more magnificent wings and halos. 
During the Renaissance, angel representation reached its peak with 
glorious color and form, which was slowly reduced to our present 
popular angel images of pretty women and children all dressed in 
white and having halos and swanlike white wings.3. Where, or in what context, does an angel live?Although each of us has our own feeling or intuition about this, the 
formal religious answer is that angels dwell in the seven or more 
heavens that exist between human beings and God. They may, and 
do, affect the real world and the real lives that are lived here, but 
they live elsewhere.
4. Why were angels created? What purpose do they serve in 
the scheme of things?This is a question we didn't ask or discuss at the beginning of the 
lesson because it would have been premature. And the answer is 
not to be found explicitly stated in the literature of angelology. 
But the answer is fairly simple. Angels exist to carry out divine 
wishes, commands, and edicts. They are the executive bureaucracy of God.An analogy might be useful here. Imagine the government of the 
country you live in, with its formal structure of leaders, lawmakers, 
judges, and any other special group needed to govern. Whatever is 
said, required, demanded, or mandated by that formal structure, 
will have no life or impact if things aren't actually done by someone. 
Every law and command has to be implemented-actually carried 
out. This is the function of bureaucracy on all levels, and it is the 
function of angels in the structure of creation. Angels get things 
done.With these short answers to our questions in place, we can return to 
tarot and see what can be done with our four archangels-Raphael 
in The Lovers, Michael in Temperance, Uriel in The Devil, and 
Gabriel in judgement-as well as those same angels in The Wheel 
of Fortune and The World. In these two cards Raphael (air) is the 
man in the upper left corner, Gabriel (water) is the eagle in the upper 
right corner, Michael (fire) is the lion in the lower right corner, and 
Uriel (earth) is the bull in the lower left corner.When any of the archangels show up in a reading, if they catch 
and hold your attention, the first thing you can say with reasonable certainty is that they have a special message just for you. The second thing is that something is being done at the very moment 
about the issue in hand. Somewhere, somehow, forces are at work 
on the issue of the reading, and a resolution is probably near at 
hand. The kind of message and the kind of resolution depends on 
the nature of the angel.
Angel 
Reading
It's time to test what we have discussed in an actual reading. First, ask 
yourself a question that really needs an answer. Write it down.Look at your question again. Make sure it asks exactly what you want to 
know. If it needs to be modified, do that now.When your question is solid, choose a spread to answer it. You may use 
a spread you already know or you can create a new one.Next, take out of your deck the six cards that contain visible angelsThe Lovers, The Wheel of Fortune, Temperance, The Devil, Judgement, 
and The World. Shuffle them and choose one. Put this card face down in 
front of you.This will be one of the cards included in your spread.Replace the remaining angel cards into the full deck, shuffle, and draw 
the rest of the cards you need.Arrange all your chosen cards in the spread pattern. They can be all 
face up, or you can lay them out face down and turn them over one at 
a time.Read the spread in answer to your question, paying particular attention 
to the angel card.The angel will have a special message for you, separate 
from and in addition to any other information you get from the spread. 
If another angel card turns up in your spread, that angel will have an 
additional message.
You remember that at the very beginning of this class we said that 
it would be different than any of the ones that preceded it. That's 
because angels are not symbols. They do not begin as commonly 
observable facts in the objective universe that we give meaning to 
and internalize. Instead, they originated with a few words of the 
Old Testament. From those words humanity has created and elaborated angels into what they have become. They begin as suggestion 
and then become real as inner experience turned into art, story, and 
anecdote.Angel 
Experience
Before you are finished with this lesson, you should make the attempt to 
experience an angel, if you can, in order to make the angel real.Close your eyes. Breathe and relax.Surround yourself with darkness and rest there awhile.In a moment, you will begin to look through the darkness of your own 
inner world for the place where angels live within you.Begin to do this now.Take your time.This place exists, and you can find it.When the place of angels opens within you, enter it and fully experience 
whatever happens there. If you can't find it, or don't want to, experience 
your inner darkness as a rest from thought and activity.The time has come to return.
Re-enter or remain in your inner darkness and float there for a 
moment.Become aware of your actual surroundings.Take two deep breaths and, when you are ready, open your eyes.Welcome back! 
=== FILE_053 ===
TEMPLESHello, and welcome to our class on temples in tarot. With this lesson we reach the end of a path, and we will see where it has led. 
There are secrets here, as there have been all along, but the nature 
of a true secret is that even when you are standing in the midst of 
it, there is nothing to see.Let us tell you the first secret of this class. There are no temples 
in tarot. Look through the deck. Find the cards that hint at a temple but do not show it. See if you can tell from these cards what the 
temple is like-either outside or within. What is there about these 
cards that says to you, "Here is a temple"?What is a temple?How do you know one when you see one?Can a temple be known by any other kind of awareness than 
sight?Formally, a temple is a building set aside for the worship 
of a deity. "Temple" is a generic word encompassing terms like 
"church," "synagogue," "mosque," and "grove." Within the temple 
there can generally be found a sanctuary where the deity of the 
place formally resides; a priesthood, complete with residence and inner chambers set aside for priestly offices; sacred implements, 
with places for both storage and public display; an altar, which can 
be any kind of ceremonial table or platform; and a sacred image or 
some physical token of the presence of deity. The temple will have 
a formal entrance and a place or space of assembly.
A temple can be either a permanent and dedicated structure, or 
a temporary place of worship set up and taken down as need arises 
but formal in its arrangement nonetheless. Even such a temporary 
or periodic temple will have its officiating priesthood, altar, sacred 
images and instruments, entrance, and assembly.These identifying signs are present in temples everywhere, 
in every social setting, from the tribal to the cosmopolitan, from 
the primitive to the highly civilized. They will be found wherever 
human beings recognize divinity in the world and in themselves. 
Temples are everywhere, and they always have been.But a temple is a secret and contains a mystery If it does not, 
it is not a temple. The mystery it contains is easier to describe and 
seems easier to grasp than the secret that it is.The mystery a temple contains is the presence of its resident 
deity. To enter a temple is to be in the presence of this mystery. 
To engage in the practices of the temple is to immerse yourself in 
mystery. If the immersion is deep enough, you may actually become 
the mystery yourself. Almost everyone has had all or part of this 
experience and will recognize the description of it.But the secret a temple is will not yield to such a simple and 
recognizable description.As numinous, purifying, and uplifting as temple mysteries can 
be, they are what they are and nothing more. Temples are here, and 
other things are there. An invisible but definite veil separates the 
sacred from the profane. That is precisely why temples exist. The 
special light they shed does not shine beyond their doors. Temples 
are built to be entered and also to be left.
Temples are physical. They are real places, given sanctity by the 
intention of their builders and by the sacred objects and ceremonies they contain. A physical temple is one mystery out of two. It 
is mysterious because no effort of the builders would make it so if 
deity did not choose to inhabit it.This first mystery can be called the temple of stone. "Temple of 
stone" is a symbolic name that can be given to any physical structure 
built to serve its god.In many, if not all, spiritual traditions, the human body is also 
said to be a temple. It, too, houses a divine spirit, and that spirit 
makes the body sacred in principle. But for the body to become a 
temple, it must be educated and dedicated to its sacred purpose. 
When that happens, everyone who comes in contact with it will 
know they are in a felt but unseen presence.That is the second mystery of the temple, and it can be called 
the temple of flesh. Anyone who wishes to do so and acts to make it 
so can become a temple of flesh, a divine house. This is true regardless of the divinity the body houses. You can become a temple if you 
truly wish it.In this second mystery, the separation between sacred interior 
and profane exterior becomes less clear. The person who is home 
to an awakened spirit looks like everyone else but shines with a 
permanent, though undefined, light. The world in the immediate 
vicinity of such a person seems somehow different and better 
than its usual self. When you find yourself in the presence of such 
a person, you will know it without necessarily knowing how you 
know, and you will be happy to be there.The mysteries of these two temples are the felt but unseen 
deities that dwell within them. Without the indwelling divine 
presence, temples have no mystery at all. They become what 
everything else is, dead ordinary. Stone is just stone. Flesh is just 
flesh.
In these two mysteries, temples are only shells. Deity dives into 
them and disappears completely, leaving only a faint glow to remind 
you of its presence. That glow alone is enough to satisfy the need of 
most people for any divine presence whatever.That glow is all the mystery that temples ever contain. But 
what, then, can be the secret of what a temple is?A human being, you perhaps, can sometimes catch fire with 
the certainty that divinity can really be found, not just remembered. Then, like the princess who kisses the frog and releases the 
enchanted prince who has disappeared within it, your awakening 
gaze touches the world and its ordinariness disappears, leaving you 
face to face with your god. Then nothing is ordinary or ever will be 
again. The temple of stone and the temple of flesh no longer simply 
contain the divine presence. They are that presence.You are that presence, and everything you see and touch 
becomes that presence. This is the secret of what a temple is. It is 
called the temple of spirit.To accomplish such a feat of vision is a nifty trick if you can do 
it, and that's where tarot comes in. A temple is not a visual symbol 
contained in any of the cards. The whole of tarot is a temple. The 
glow of pure spirit is present within it. That is its attraction. Of 
course, people can't actually see it. Even its students and enthusiasts don't see it so much as sense it, just the way worshipers do in a 
church, a synagogue, or a mosque.But when you know that tarot is a temple, built of symbols instead 
of brick or stone, you are halfway to becoming a temple of flesh as a 
reader. In your physical person, you can begin to shine with knowledge. The words you speak to a querent will be the right words. What 
you see in the cards will be true as well as accurate. All the symbols 
that make the structure of tarot-its names, numbers, and imageswill speak through you, and you will become an oracle in truth.With time, effort, and intent, it is possible to arrive at this 
oracular state, to contain it within you. But as extraordinary as this is, something even greater lies beyond it. That is the secret of 
becoming what speaks through you, of being what you see and say. 
Then you will go beyond knowing the mysteries of tarot-you will 
be that mystery.
The temple in tarot is the temple of tarot. All the things you 
have learned about tarot over time have been building blocks of 
that temple. In this way, learning tarot is like the process of initiation in Freemasonry and the magickal orders of the Hermetic tradition. It is a process of continuous enlightenment, and it binds its 
parts into a great and unsuspected unity.Not an awful lot of people have seen the temple of tarot or 
even heard of it. It may be that you don't see it yet or even want to. 
But if you do, it can bring you to amazing knowledge and skill and 
transform your whole experience of life.All that we said so far in this class may have lit a lamp for you, or 
it may well be just words, just talk. Before we finish, let's do something that will help to make the temple of tarot real.Building 
the Temple 
of Tarot 
(Part i)
In a moment, you will begin to consciously build the outermost shell of 
the temple with knowledge you already possess, at least in part. Read 
through all the following instructions before actually doing them.First, mentally name each of the Major Arcana in order. As you do so, 
visualize each card's number and also the complete image of the card. If 
one or more of the Majors does not come to mind, go on to the next 
card you can remember.When you are finished with the Majors, review each card of the Minor 
Arcana, including the court cards, mentally saying the number or name 
and suit of each and then seeing the image of the card as clearly as you 
can.Work through one suit at a time in any suit order you wish.
Take your time. Complete this task, if you can, in one sitting.Close your eyes. Breathe and relax.Begin.When you can name and visualize every card in the deck, the building stones of the temple of tarot will have arrived on site, ready for 
assembly. 
=== FILE_054 ===
INTEGRATION: 
RIVERS, TOWERS, ANGELS, AND TEMPLESHello, and welcome to our integration class for rivers, towers, angels, 
and temples in tarot. These four symbols capture the essence of the 
Hermetic vision, which is contained in the saying, `As above, so 
below" It is the most famous of all sayings in the esoteric universe. 
If there is magic in tarot, if there is purity and spirit, it is distilled 
in those four words.As above, so below-the whole of creation in a nutshell.But a nutshell, though big enough, is also too small. Our four 
symbols give us everything it contains and more. In fact, when their 
sense is grasped, it tends to crack the nutshell wide open.This lesson deals with what may be dangerous matters. It 
may shift the foundation of your most cherished perceptions. For 
Western magick, as well as for the three major Western religions, 
to many of whose assumptions most of us unwittingly subscribe, 
above and below is at the heart of everything. Spirit, divinity, God, 
one's purest self, lives high above and far away. The body, physical 
nature, ego, one's poorest and weakest self, lives below, right here. The whole apparently circular journey of flesh and the spirit is the 
movement of spirit downward and matter upward, the reciprocal engine of emergence and return that we have talked about so 
often.
RiversBut both emergence and return are the flow of spirit downward. 
This is the symbol of the river in tarot. The endless flow of spirit 
waters the garden of the world, fills it with goodness and wealth, and 
gives it life. To float on the current of the river is to be in harmony 
with the divine intention. To follow the whole course of the river 
to its apotheosis in the sea is to finish the journey of return without 
changing direction.In tarot, rivers speak of harmony and effortlessness, of cleansing 
and enriching, of letting events evolve and unfold. Allowing them 
to reach their natural conclusion without fear and with a minimum 
of interference is a continuous act of faith.Rivers catch and channel the endless falling rivulets of small 
events and minor dramas, carrying them all away as streaming 
karma and leaving the landscape clean.The lesson of rivers in tarot is that troubles dissolve and problems resolve if you simply float upon the intent of the world.TowersAs rivers move with gravity, towers struggle against it. As rivers flow 
from above to below, towers rise from below to above. Towers are 
expressions of effort. They are symbols of discontent.For the builders of towers, what is is not enough. What can 
be is better. The future is better than past or present. Work, skill, talent, challenges met and overcome-these lead to improvement 
of self and world. Heaven is not a gift of grace; it is an earned 
achievement.
Towers rise. They point at distant goals. To conceive a tower 
is assume an obstacle, a problem, or a difficulty. To complete a 
tower is to win a victory over things as they are. Towers challenge 
entropy, the tendency of things to run downhill to an anticipated 
chaos.In their highest sense, towers in tarot are the symbols of your 
ambition. They assume a faith in your own abilities and your willingness to work to create whatever you need. Their simple statement is that problems don't go away by themselves. They need to 
be dealt with. Their message is: Plan. Don't give up. Point at a goal, 
earn it, and it will be yours by right.The tower is a prime symbol of success. Divinity is involved only 
as the source of the problem your tower is meant to overcome.River is to tower as divine is to human, as flow is to effort, as 
nature is to artifice, as organism is to mechanism. This apparent 
disparity, however intense at its root, for the most part merges 
seamlessly in our everyday awareness into our everyday process. 
The energies of above and below together make us who we 
normally are and who we are normally conscious of being,And that brings us to what we don't normally see and what we 
are not normally conscious of at all.AngelsAngels are neither above nor below. They live and act in a world 
between. They neither rise nor fall, neither work nor flow by nature. 
They are the servants of both God and man, but they themselves 
are neither divine nor human. They never fail, nor do they achieve. They never begin, nor do they arrive. They have neither goal nor 
direction, and so they are quite free of the issues of emergence and 
return, except to help with them.
An angel is somewhat like the elevator operator in a tall building. He has a job to do, but he is quite unconcerned with what floor 
you get off at or what you do there. And he has a life of his own. 
This is the key to understanding angels. They have lives of their 
own. And this opens the door to some tricky questions.Do they? Do they have a separate existence? Do you exist separate from the divine source, and angels live separate from both?There is an intuition, a suspicion, in us all that assembling our 
experience of being alive and present into a number of separate 
levels is not quite right. God up there, us down here, and angels in 
between. A simple arrangement, but perhaps a little clunky.Angels in tarot serve to remind us that above and below by 
themselves are not a complete explanation. Two worlds are not 
enough. If there are two, they need at least a third to bring them 
together.Angels exist to serve, but to serve they must be invoked. They 
must be called from either above or below, and when they are called, 
they must appear. That is their power in tarot.Call an angel into a reading as you have learned to do, and it 
will appear. If an angel appears in a reading unbidden, it was sent. 
Angels are messengers of power. To call and receive messengers of 
power is an act of intense understanding, though to discuss the uses 
and responsibilities of angelic power is beyond the scope of this 
lesson. That such a power even exists is a secret, one of many contained in the imagery of the cards.
TemplesIs it a surprise that one of the greatest secrets of tarot is contained 
in a symbol that isn't even visible? The temple, last of the symbols in 
our series, is yet another whole world to add to above and below.Within it is everything that exists-the three worlds of above, 
below, and between. That is its mystery. The temple's secret is that 
everything, all of it together, is the temple. The secret of the temple 
in tarot is that tarot, too, is the temple-every card, every meaning, 
and every use of it.The secret of the temple transforms it, so that nothing in it is 
ordinary. You see that everything is made of numinous light. But 
that leads to a second secret, the biggest one we have seen and the 
most dangerous to grasp.The temple's light is not sacred. The divine presence is not its 
source, since divinity itself is within the temple along with everything else. The light that illuminates the temple is the felt presence 
of the mystery that entirely surrounds it.The temple of being, like everything in it, is a mystery. Mystery 
flows away from it endlessly in all directions-uncontainable, 
unexplainable, unappeasable, undiminishable.Within is every explanation of mystery we can conceive. The 
temple walls are built of our explanations. They serve to protect 
us from the annihilating vastness of the unknowable. Ain Soph, 
the nothing without end that Qabalah names but can do nothing 
about, is an attempt to gingerly touch the unknowable with one 
uncertain finger.The temple that contains us contains everything we can name. 
Tarot is a model of that temple. It is constructed of the great explanations of spirituality, psychology, magick, and culture. No matter 
how heavy or cumbersome the explanation, tarot has been able to 
carry it and make it light.
When you do a tarot reading, be aware, if you can, that you are 
manipulating a mystery of many parts. You and your querent alike 
are mysteries, as is any issue that concerns you. Be aware, if you can, 
of your true stature, and let your readings be filled with light.We are at the end. Nothing more can be said that would be useful. But before we go ...Living 
Darkness 
Reading
Close your eyes. Breathe and relax.Surround yourself with darkness. Take the time to make the darkness 
complete, and then rest within it.Become conscious of the darkness as alive and aware. Find the pulse of 
your own awareness within the darkness. Be slow and thorough.The darkness is now complete, and it includes you.Nothing separates you from it.There is no difference between above and below.Here is the same as there.Now is the same as later.Inside is not different from outside.You are a living darkness.Experience this fully.
In a moment, you will open your eyes and see the world, but you will 
stay in a meditative state.The living darkness will remain with you, fully 
aware within your awareness.Take two deep breaths and, when you are ready, open your eyes.Stay in a meditative state and keep the mystery of the living darkness 
with you.Clear your deck if you know how.Then shuffle it, and as you shuffle, let 
a question arise from within.Wait for it-don't force it.When you are ready, lay out a spread to answer your question.Read with the secret knowledge of the mystery that surrounds you and 
illuminates the cards from within. 
=== FILE_055 ===
SYMBOL SPREAD: 
RIVER, TOWER, ANGEL, AND TEMPLEThis spread is based upon the symbols studied in our last set of 
classes: rivers, towers, angels, and temples. The reading can be done 
either without a question or with "What do I need to know, learn, 
understand, or do about ... ?"There are two parts to this reading: preparation and the reading 
itself
Preparation: 
Building 
Your Temple 
(Part II)
As you may recall, although there are hints of sacred space throughout 
the deck, there are no temples per se to be seen.The deck itself is the 
temple.We are about to take that idea one step further and teach you 
how to personalize the temple of your deck. Once you have learned 
how, you may, if you wish, perform this preparatory ritual before any 
reading session.1. Find all the MajorArcana cards and lay them out in order from 0 to 21.2.When you have done this, gather them together in an ordered stack. 
Begin by placing The World face up in front of you. Put the other 
Majors face up, one at a time, on top of The World in reverse order, 
ending with The Fool on top.Then turn the entire stack face down and 
put it to the side.3. Do the same for each of the four Minor Arcana suits, ordering them 
from king to ace.4. Place the four kings face up.Then place the other cards of each suit on 
top of the kings in reverse order.When you are finished, you should have 
four separate piles with the aces on top. Keep all four piles face up.S.Arrange the stacks of Minor Arcana cards into your Elemental Array. 
To do this, look at the four aces and decide which you like best at this 
time. Place this pile to your left.6. Continue to choose the aces in order of preference, placing each 
subsequent pile to the right of the previous one.7.When you are finished, you should have four separate stacks showing 
the aces in your order of preference from most to least liked, with the 
pile of Major Arcana cards off to one side. Here is an example:
I: Majors2:Wands*  3: Cups3: Pentacles4: Swords**  8. Look through the MajorArcana cards and find your birth cards, if you know them. Remove them and place them face up on the table. (If you do not know your birth cards, that's okay. Follow the directions without them.)You have gathered together the building blocks of your temple. Now it is time to complete the structure. Keep the sacredness of your act in mind as you perform these final steps.9. Turn each stack face down, leaving them in position. Keep your birth cards face up.10. Gather the separate piles of cards together into a single stack with the Majors on top (excluding your birth cards), followed by each of the four suits in your order of preference.Your least-liked suit will be at the bottom of the deck.I I.Take your birth card with the lower number and place it face down on the top of the deck and place the card with the higher number at the bottom. If your birth cards are Sun-Wheel-Magician, insert the Wheel of Fortune card towards the center of the deck.12. Hold your completed temple between your hands as you breathe and relax. If you like to offer a prayer before beginning a reading, this is an excellent time to do so.
The ReadingIt is now time to proceed with your reading. If you would like to 
use one of the four questions mentioned earlier (What do I need to 
know, learn, understand, or do about ... ), concentrate on it while 
thoroughly shuffling the deck. If not, focus on being in a receptive 
state.Note: If you are reading for someone else and have first created a personal temple of your deck, briefly shuffle the cards before 
handing them to your querent to shuffle more thoroughly.The layout consists of four cards:ANGEL CARDi. The Archangel who has been sent to deliver your message.To find out which angel has been sent, shuffle your deck and then 
turn the cards over one at a time until one of the following cards 
appears:
• The Lovers: Raphael is the healer, the reconciler, and uniter of 
all things wounded, sick, broken, and dysfunctional. He is the 
angel of love and joy.• Temperance: Michael is the leader of the divine armies against 
the forces of darkness. He is the angel of wrath who brings justice, offers protection, and guides willing souls on the path to 
divine illumination.• The Devil: Uriel is a force of fire and transformation. He illuminates situations and gives warnings. He is the angel of laughter and secrets.• Judgement: Gabriel is the bringer of prophecies and revelations. He is the angel who resurrects what has died and awakens 
what is asleep.The Angel card gives you the context of the reading. If you have 
asked a question, consider how the nature of the angel who has 
appeared addresses that question.Place the Angel card in position #i at the top.Choose the next three cards in the deck directly following the 
Angel card and place them in position according to the layout diagram. Use any method you like to interpret them.THE ANGEL'S MESSAGE2. The message you need to hear right now.This card contains a message of importance or the primary answer 
to the question you have asked.
RIVER3. What flows easily.The River card describes the type of energy that will carry you along 
naturally, with little or no help or interference from you.TOWER4. What requires your effort.This card describes what is demanded of you in the way of effort, 
attitude, or resources.This is a powerful spread that consciously invokes angelic energy. 
Use it with care. It is best to allow some time to contemplate the 
message you receive.
 
